SECTION: Quantile Fourier Transform, Quantile Series, and Nonparametric Estimation
of Quantile Spectra
A nonparametric method is proposed for estimating the quantile spectra and cross-spectra
introduced in Li (2012; 2014) as bivariate functions of frequency and quantile level.
The method is based on the quantile discrete Fourier transform (QDFT)
defined by trigonometric quantile regression and the quantile series (QSER) defined by the inverse
Fourier transform of the QDFT. A nonparametric spectral estimator is constructed from the autocovariance function of the QSER using the lag-window (LW) approach.
Smoothing techniques are also employed to reduce the statistical variability of the LW estimator across quantiles when the underlying spectrum varies smoothly with respect to the quantile level.
The performance of the proposed estimation method is evaluated through a simulation study.

: Fourier transform, quantile-frequency analysis, quantile regression, smoothing spline, spectrum, time series.

SECTION: Introduction
The concept of quantile spectra and cross-spectra was introduced in Li (2012; 2014) through the quantile periodograms and cross-periodograms constructed from trigonometric quantile regression. Letbe stationary time series with marginal distribution functionsand density functions. Letbe the lag-bivariate distribution functions
andbe the lag-bivariate level-crossing rates. Then,
the quantile spectra and cross-spectra of these series at a quantile levelcan be written as

where

and.
The quantile spectra and cross-spectra are analogous to the ordinary power spectra and cross-spectra in the sense thattakes place of the standard deviation andtakes place of the ordinary
autocorrelation function (Brockwell and Davis 1992, p. 435). Becausecoincides with the ordinary autocorrelation function of the indicator processes, the quantile spectra and cross-spectra in () are closely related to the spectral analysis methods for indicator processes (Davis and Mikosch 2009; Hagemann 2013; Dette et al. 2015; Baruník and Kley 2019).

While the spectra of indicator processes are typically treated as functions offor fixed, we regardin () as a bivariate function ofandon. Exploration of the quantile spectra and cross-spectra as bivariate functions
constitutes what we call quantile-frequency analysis or QFA (Li 2020).

Estimating the quantile spectra and cross-spectra defined by () is not as straightforward as estimating the ordinary spectra and cross-spectra of indicator processes, because they are derived indirectly from the quantile periodograms and cross-periodograms. In this paper, we propose an estimation method that takes advantage
of the concept of quantile discrete Fourier transform (QDFT) introduced in Li (2014).

The gist of the proposed method is as follows: First, we use the solutions of trigonometric quantile regression to construct the QDFT for each observed serieson a finite grid of quantile levels; then, for each quantile level, we compute the inverse Fourier transform of the QDFT to producesequences in the time domain, which we call quantile series (QSER); and finally, we use the sample autocovariance function of the QSER, which we call
quantile autocovariance function (QACF), to construct
a nonparametric estimator of the quantile spectra and cross-spectra in () by following
the conventional lag-window (LW) approach. We further employ a smoothing procedure across quantiles
when the underlying spectrum is suitably smooth with respect to the quantile level. The resulting estimator,
called lag-window estimator with quantile smoothing, or LWQS, is aimed at leveraging
the smoothness of the underlying spectrum to reduce the statistical variability of the LW estimator.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2, we introduce the QDFT, QSER, and QACF.
In Section 3, we describe the LW and LWQS estimators.
In Section 4, we present the results of a simulation study on the performance
of the proposed method. Concluding remarks are given in Section 5.
In addition, a summary of R functions for the proposed method is provided in Appendix I,
and additional results of the simulation study in Appendix II.

SECTION: Quantile Fourier Transform and Quantile Series
Given a data recordof length,
letbe theFourier frequencies.
For each, consider the following
trigonometric quantile regression solution at quantile level:

whereis the objective function
of quantile regression (Koenker 2005, p. 5). In addition, for(i.e.,whenis even), let

and for(i.e.,), let

Based on these trigonometric quantile regression solutions, we define the quantile discrete Fourier transform (QDFT)
ofat quantile levelas

This definition of QDFT is motivated by the fact that the ordinary DFT can be constructed in the same way by replacingwith the objective functionof least-squares regression.

It is easy to see that the sequenceis conjugate symmetric:

Therefore, in order to compute the QDFT, one only need to solve
the quantile regression problems ()–() for, i.e., forwhenis odd andwhenis even; the conjugate symmetry property
provides the values of QDFT for the remaining frequencies. Linear programming algorithms
such as those implemented by the functionin the R package ‘quantreg’ (Koenker 2005) can be employed
to compute the quantile regression solutions efficiently.

Based on the QDFT in (), the quantile periodogram and
cross-periodogram (Li 2012; 2014) of theseriesat quantile levelcan be written as

This expression of the quantile periodograms (QPER)
in terms of the QDFT is consistent with the conventional definition of the ordinary periodograms in terms of the ordinary DFT (Brockwell and Davis 1992, p. 443). Under suitable conditions Li (2012; 2014, p. 557), it can be shown
thatfor fixedand,
whereis complex Gaussian with mean vectorand covariance matrix. This is analogous to the result for the ordinary periodogram whereis replaced by the ordinary spectrum (Brockwell and Davis 1992, p. 446).

For each, we can also compute the inverse Fourier transform
of the QDFT, i.e.,

We call this sequence the quantile series (QSER) ofat quantile level. Note that the QSER is a
real-valued time series due to (). Also note that the sample mean of the QSER,, coincides with, which is nothing but the-quantile of, becauseby definition.

In matrix notation, let.
Then, the sample autocovariance function (ACF)
of the QSER in () is given by

where.
We callin () the sample quantile autocovariance function (QACF) at level.
It is easy to show that the usual relationship between the ordinary ACF and the ordinary periodogram (Brockwell and Davis 1992, p. 443) holds true for the QACF and the QPER, i.e.,

whereand.

SECTION: Lag-Window Spectral Estimator
Consider what we call the quantile-crossing process

which is stationary with mean 0 and variance. Under suitable conditions (Wu 2007; Li 2012), the quantile regression coefficients in ()–() have the Bahadur-type representations

Define

It follows from the Bahadur-type representations that

and. Therefore,in () can be regarded as an estimate of the ordinary
ACF of the stationary process, denoted as. Observe that

Whenis absolutely summable for alland, we have

In light of this relationship, we take the conventional lag-window (LW) approach (Priestley 1981, p. 433)
and propose the following estimator for the quantile spectrum:

whereis the QACF given by () andis a suitable nonnegative function, an example of which
is the Tukey-Hanning window (Priestley 1981, p. 443)

In the spectral case whereand, the LW estimatorbecomes the quantile periodogramaccording to ().

The LW estimator is expected to work well estimatingas
a function offor fixed. There are situations whereis smooth inas well.
For example,is continuous inwhen (a)is continuous infor all, (b)is continuous infor all,, and, and (c)is uniformly summable overfor alland.
In such cases, further improvement in estimation accuracy is expected if the smoothness
is properly taken into account.
This can be accomplished, for example, by first evaluating the LW estimator
on a finite grid of quantile levelsand then applying a smoothing procedure to the resulting sequencefor fixed.
We will refer to the LW estimator with post-smoothing across quantiles as the LWQS estimator.

SECTION: Simulation Study
To investigate the performance of the estimation method outlined in the previous section, we use a set of simulated data withand. The first series,, is a nonlinear mixture of these components,, and:

whereand.
The second series,, is a delayed copy of:

The three components are
zero-mean unit-variance autoregressive (AR) processes, satisfying

where,,andwith,,
and where,, andare mutually independent Gaussian white noise. In other words,is a low-pass series with spectral peak at frequency,is a high-pass series with spectral peak at frequency,
andis a band-pass series with spectral peak at frequency.
The mixing functionandare designed to promote or reduce these spectral patterns
at different quantile regions.

Figureshows the quantile spectrum and cross-spectrum of the series in ()-()
evaluated atand.
These spectra are computed as the ensemble mean of quantile periodograms
and cross-periodograms from 5000 Monte Carlo runs. The cross-spectrum is shown by its real and complex parts in the second row of Figure, which are
known as co-spectrum and quadrature-spectrum, respectively,

Figureshows the series from one of the simulation runs. The corresponding quantile periodogram and cross-periodogram are shown in Figure. Figuredepicts the QSER of these series at,, and. The corresponding QACFs are shown in Figure.

Figureshows the LW spectral estimates obtained from the series in Figure.
These estimates are constructed according to () using the Tukey-Hanning window () with. They can be viewed as a smoothed version of the raw quantile periodogram and cross-periodogram in Figurewith respect to the frequency variable.

To measure the accuracy of spectral estimation, we employ the Kullback-Leibler divergence

This spectral measure is closely related to Whittle’s likelihood (Whittle 1953) and has been used as a similarity measure for time series clustering and classification (Kakizawa, Shumway, and Tanaguch 1998).
The KLD of the estimates in Figureequals 0.198.

Figureshows the LWQS estimates obtained by applying quantile smoothing
to the LW estimates in Figureusing the R functionwith
the smoothing parameter chosen by the generalized cross-validation (GCV) criterion (R Core Team 2024).
The resulting KLD equals 0.194. In this case, the KLD is reduced slightly, but the effect of quantile smoothing
is barely noticeable when compared to Figure.

A better result is shown in Figure. These estimates are also obtained by applying the R functionto the LW estimates in Figure,
but the smoothing parameteris set to 0.9 instead of being determined by GCV.
The estimates in Figureappear less noisy when compared to the estimates in Figuresand. The KLD is reduced significantly from 0.198 and 0.194, respectively, to 0.109.

A closer examination of the LW estimates reveals strong positive correlations across quantiles.
These correlations are not handled effectively bywith GCV.
To take the correlations into account, we use the R functionin the ‘mgcv’ package (Wood 2022). Under the framework
of generalized additive mixture models (Wang 1998), this function jointly
estimates the smoothing splines and the parameters of a user-specified correlation structure
for the random effect while retaining GCV for smoothing parameter selection.

Figureshows the result of applyingto the LW estimates
in Figureassuming the correlation structure
of an AR(1) process. The KLD of these estimates equals 0.130, which is a significant improvement overwith GCV. This improvement is achieved at a higher computational cost: a 100-fold increase in computing
time when compared to. Computation can be accelerated by parallelization
for different frequencies.

Figureand Tableprovide a more comprehensive assessment
of the LWQS estimator usingand. The results are based on 1000 Monte Caro runs.
As shown in Figure,with GCV offers a slight improvement over
no quantile smoothing; a significant improvement can be made by settingmanually within a range of values, with the optimal choice being= 0.9. Furthermore, Tableconfirms the superiority
ofoverfor the LWQS estimator
when the smoothing parameter is selected by GCV.

SECTION: Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we propose a nonparametric method for estimating the quantile spectra and cross-spectra
introduced through trigonometric quantile regression in Li (2012; 2014). This method is based
on the quantile discrete Fourier transform (QDFT) defined by the trigonometric quantile regression
and the quantile series (QSER) defined by the inverse Fourier transform of the QDFT.
The autocovariance function of the QSER, or QACF, facilitates the construction
of a lag-window (LW) spectral estimator for the quantile spectra and cross-spectra.

We also consider the application of a smoothing procedure to the LW estimates across quantiles
in order to further improve the estimation accuracy when the underlying
spectrum is smooth with respect to the quantile level variable.
The quantile smoothing procedure turns out to be more effective when
the observed positive correlation across quantiles is taken into account.

The nonparametric method in this paper complements the semi-parametric method
investigated in Chen et al. (2021) and Jiménez-Varón et al. (2024). The latter fits
a parametric autoregressive (AR) model for the QSER on a grid of quantile levels and then applies a
nonparametric smoothing procedure to the AR parameters across quantiles. While the AR models
in these papers are derived from the quantile periodogram, the introduction of QSER in this paper provides
the possibility for a more direct approach to AR modeling: one can simply fit an AR model to
the QSER directly by least squares or through the QACF by solving the Yule-Walker equations.
A comprehensive treatment of this approach will be the topic t of a future paper.

SECTION: References
SECTION: Appendix I: The R Functions
The following is a summary of the relevant R functions for the proposed method.
These functions are available in the R package ‘qfa’ (version 3.0) which can be installed from. An installable R packageis also available at.

: a function that computes the quantile discrete Fourier transform (QDFT) of a univariate or multivariate time series at a user-specified sequence of quantile levels.

: a function that computes the quantile series (QSER) of a
univariate or multivariate time series at a user-specified sequence of quantile levels from the time series
or the QDFT produced by.

: a function that computes the quantile autocovariance function (QACF) of a
univariate or multivariate time series at a user-specified sequence of quantile levels from the time series
or the QDFT produced by.

: a function that computes the lag-window (LW) spectral estimate for a given bandwidth parameter from the QACF produced by.

: a function that computes the lag-window (LW) spectral estimate with quantile smoothing (QS)
for a given bandwidth parameter directly from a time series or from the QACF produced by.

: a function that produces a quantile-frequency image plot for a real-valued quantile spectrum.

: a function that computes the quantile series (QSER) from the QDFT produced by.

: a function that computes the quantile periodogram
(QPER) from the QDFT produced by.

: a function that computes the quantile autocovariance function (QACF)
from the QDFT produced by.

: a low-level function that computes the trigonometric quantile regression (TQR) solution
for a single frequency at a user-specified sequence of quantile levels.

SECTION: Appendix II: Additional Simulation Results
The (squared) quantile coherence spectrum foris defined as

Figureshows the quantile coherence spectrum for the pair of time series defined
by () and (). By construction, a significant level of coherence is expected
around frequency 0.2, but less pronounced at higher quantiles than low quantiles.

The quantile coherence spectrum can be estimated by plugging the respective estimates
of quantile spectrum and cross-spectrum in (). For the series shown in Figure,
the LW and LWQS estimates of the quantile coherence spectrum are shown in Figure.
They are obtained from the respective estimates of quantile spectrum and cross-spectrum shown in
Figures–. It is interesting to observe that the smaller KLD of LWQS
withfor estimating the quantile spectrum and cross-spectrum does not yields
a smaller () error for estimating the quantile coherence spectrum, whereaswith= 0.9 still produces the best result.

Consider the ARMA processdefined by

where

Figuredepicts the quantile spectrum of this process.
The results for estimating this spectrum by the LWQS estimator withand various options for the bandwidth parameter and the quantile smoothing method are shown in Figureand Table.

As in the case of the experiment in Section 4, slight improvement over LW without smoothing is achieved bywith GCV, and significant improvement is achieved if the smoothing parameter takes the optimal value= 1. By assuming correlated residuals of the AR(1) type,with correlated residuals produces more accurate estimates thanwith GCV at the expense of significantly higher computational burden.