SECTION: Neural information processing and time-series prediction with only two dynamical memristors

Memristive devices are commonly benchmarked by the multi-level programmability of their resistance states. Neural networks utilizing memristor crossbar arrays as synaptic layers largely rely on this feature. However, the dynamical properties of memristors, such as the adaptive response times arising from the exponential voltage dependence of the resistive switching speed remain largely unexploited. Here, we propose an information processing scheme which fundamentally relies on the latter. We realize simple dynamical memristor circuits capable of complex temporal information processing tasks. We demonstrate an artificial neural circuit with one nonvolatile and one volatile memristor which can detect a neural spike pattern in a very noisy environment, fire a single voltage pulse upon successful detection and reset itself in an entirely autonomous manner. Furthermore, we implement a circuit with only two nonvolatile memristors which can learn the operation of an external dynamical system and perform the corresponding time-series prediction with high accuracy.

SECTION: IIntroduction

Due to their compact size and unsophisticated structure[1], low-energy operation[2], high speed[3,4,5]and CMOS compatibility[6,7,8], the applications of memristor synapses in artificial neural networks (ANNs) are booming. Crossbar arrays[9]of nonvolatile memristors exhibiting multiple resistive states with linear current-voltage [] characteristics[8,10]play a key role: The single devices represent the analog synaptic weights, whereas the crossbar array grants the full connectivity between the neighboring neural layers which are typically implemented by standard CMOS circuits[11,12]. Such hybrid CMOS-memristor architectures have been utilized in various neuromorphic computing tasks from data classification[13,14,15]to feature extraction[10,16]and as field-programmable analog arrays[17].

Memristor-based synaptic layers efficiently accelerate ANN operation at low energy costs. However, the recursive tuning of the synaptic weights during training still generates extensive software overheads. Alternative approaches exploit the dynamical properties of resistive switching phenomena such as the resistance relaxation of volatile memristors[18,19]or the exponential dependence of the switching time on the bias voltage[20,21]which facilitates short-term/long-term learning and forgetting abilities[22,23,24]. As a common figure of merit, ANNs relying on dynamical memristor operation require considerably less network nodes and trained synapses to achieve the same computational efficiency as the more traditional deep neural networks (DNNs) where merely the static properties of the memristors are exploited.
The role of dynamical complexity in the nonlinear, and often adaptive current response of memristors and their small circuits have been revealed recently[25]. In a pioneering work, W. Yi et al.[26]have faithfully reproduced 23 known neural spiking patterns by utilizing the fourth-order dynamical complexity facilitated by only two coupled VO2memristors. As a next step toward fully memristor-based neuromorphic circuits exhibiting unrivaled footprint, energy efficiency and computational power, the exploration of such dynamical building blocks and the corresponding training algorithms is imperative.

Here, we demonstrate a temporal information processing scheme where a simple circuit consisting of a single nonvolatile memristor implements a complex signal processing device block with a customizable temporal response. As a key component, a negative offset voltage - like artificial forgetting - drives the memristive element towards the initial high-resistance state. In contrast, the analysed input pattern - like learning - pushes it towards low-resistances. A series resistor component introduces a significant voltage division in the sufficiently low-resistance memristive states, which dramatically slows down the response of the memristive element. This simple scheme results in a versatile memristive dynamical system with a very wide tunability of the dynamics and the capability for adjustable short- and long-term memory operations.

First, we demonstrate through simulation and experiment that such a small dynamical circuit based on a single nonvolatile Ta2O5memristor is sufficient to recognize specific temporal patterns such as sub-threshold / super-threshold voltage pulses or neural voltage spikes buried in noise. Next, we extend this detector unit with (i) an oscillator circuit based on a single volatile Mott memristor and (ii) a feedback loop. Thereby we realize a complete artificial neural circuit (Fig.1a) which emits a neural voltage spike upon receiving the desired signal.

Finally, we extend our detection scheme towards circuits with multiple nonvolatile memristors, where each memristor is sensitized to a different dynamical aspect of the input signal stream. This implements a dynamical computing layer that can learn the operation of an external dynamical system and perform time-series prediction[18,19,27,28,29]as illustrated in Fig.1b. Our demonstrator circuit relies on only two Ta2O5memristors and the linear combination of their output currents. Thanks to the tunable memristor dynamics, it achieves excellent prediction accuracy for the benchmark dynamical system. This result competes with prior pioneering studies, where an array of 90 volatile dynamical memristors was applied to emulate the operation of the same dynamical system with similar accuracy[18].

Our simple memristive circuits shown in Fig.1a,b illustrate the basic operating principle of a scheme that can be generalized to an arbitrary number of input channels with individually tunable dynamics, whose operating range may cover many orders of magnitude, from seconds to nanoseconds.

SECTION: IIResults and discussion

SECTION: The architecture of the information processing circuits.

In both of our temporal signal processing schemes (Figs.1a,b) we utilize crosspoint Ta/Ta2O5/Pt nonvolatile memristors symbolized by the red icons in Figs.1(a,b), and illustrated in the inset of Fig.2(a).
A representative current-voltage [] characteristics is shown in Fig.2(a). It was measured in the setup highlighted in red in Fig.2(d). Thebias voltage corresponding to the voltage drop on the memristor is calculated according to, whereis a series resistor andis the triangular output of the voltage source. Positive voltage refers to a higher potential on the Ta top electrode with respect to the Pt bottom electrode. The hysteretictrace corresponds to filamentary type resistive switching[3,30,31]between metallic states in the analog tunable 1 k– 10 kregime[8,10,32].

The neural circuit in Fig.1a also utilizes a VO2-based volatile memristor denoted by the blue icon in Fig.1(a) and displayed in the inset of Fig.2(b).
Figure2(b) exemplifies a typicalcurve of the Au/VO2/Au memristor, measured in series with theresistor. This corresponds to unipolar, volatile resistive switching due to a temperature and electric field controlled Mott transition[33,34]. In our work, the asymmetric planar layout and the only 30 nm wide lateral gap of the Au electrodes grant a very small and, thus, homogeneous active volume. A detailed experimental analysis and finite element simulations of the device performance and resistive switching mechanism can be found in Ref.[34]. In the experiments discussed later, the circuit environment of the Au/VO2/Au memristor, highlighted in blue in Fig.2(d), is further extended with the capacitorand the additional resistor. These, together with theresistor form a conventional VO2oscillation circuit[26]. Figure2(c) illustrates a single output voltage spike, i.e. a single period of the oscillator circuit. Further details on the device preparation of both memristive devices are provided in Supplementary Discussion section S1.

Figure2(d) summarizes the architecture of the neural circuit illustrated in Fig.1(a). The lower and upper dashed arrows symbolize the coupling of the input detector and the output firing modules as well as the feedback of the output to the input, respectively.

The detailed circuit schematics, including the instrumental implementation of the coupling and the feedback is provided in Supplementary Discussion section S3. The circuit for time-series prediction (Fig.1(b)) relies on the Ta2O5memristors only, but instead of a single input detector, double Ta2O5devices with detuned dynamical properties analyze the input stream.

SECTION: The memory time constant of the detector circuit.

Before presenting the experimentally implemented information processing units, we illustrate the principle of our detection scheme via numerical simulations relying on a minimal model. The key ingredient is the exponential slowdown of the resistive switching as thebias voltage is linearly decreased on the Ta/Ta2O5/Pt memristor. The exponential voltage dependence of theresistive switching time constant on the bias voltage is commonly known as the ‘voltage-time dilemma’[20,21]. It is a general figure of merit observed in a broad range of resistive switching systems[35]which describes the dependence of thecharacteristics or the pulsed switching response on the speed and voltage amplitude of the driving signal.

In our simulations, we assume, where theandadjustable parameters describe the voltage-dependent dynamical properties, that can be fitted to measured characteristics of our Ta2O5devices (see Supplementary Discussion section S2).When a time-dependentdriving voltage is applied to the memristor and theserial resistor, the voltage drop on the memristor is calculated as. The dynamics of the system is determined by a minimal model according to theanddifferential equations for positive/negative bias voltages, respectively. Thestate variable is related to the memristor resistance according to, where() denotes the highest (lowest) resistance state enabled in our model.

In a highly simplified physical picture, the variation ofcan be associated with the voltage-controlled manipulation of the oxygen ion concentration in the filamentary region of the Ta/Ta2O5/Pt memristor[25]. In the initial HRS state the poorly conducting filamentary region is saturated with oxygen ions (). Due to the applied positive voltage, the mobile oxygen ions are removed from the active region at a rate which is proportional both to the voltage-controlled time constantand theamount of oxygen ions in the filamentary region. Such a process results in the decrease of the filament resistance and is self-terminated when all the mobile oxygen ions are removed (and). In practice, however, the set process is rather limited by the series resistance, i.e., whenbecomes smaller thanthe bias voltage on the memristor decreases, meanwhile the voltage-dependent time constant exponentially increases, and the set transition terminates. At opposite voltage polarity, the oxygen ions are actuated from the surrounding oxide matrix towards the filamentary region, yielding an increase of the resistance. In this case, the rate is again proportional to, as well as theamount of the available mobile oxygen ions in the active filamentary volume.

SECTION: Simulated temporal signal detection.

We apply the above dynamical equations for a single Ta2O5memristor and a series resistor (red part in Fig.2(d)).
The input pattern scheme illustrated in Fig.3(a) consists of positive programming voltage pulses which drive the memristor towards its LRS. In this simple example we use pulses of the same magnitude, but later we show an application where the input information is encoded in the pulse amplitudes. Meanwhile, a constant negative offset voltage is added to theinput stream, which intends to return the memristor to the initial HRS, and thereby facilitates the forgetting of the programmed information.

The red line in Fig.3(b) illustrates a situation, where the first programming pulse decreases thememristor resistance tofrom its initialvalue, but afterwards a sufficient negative offset voltage drives the memristor back to its initial HRS well before the arrival of the next programming pulse. The variation of thememristor voltage and thememory time constant during this process are respectively demonstrated by the gray curve in Fig.3(b) and Fig.3(c).

A fundamentally different behavior is observed when the negative offset voltage is moderately decreased. The first voltage pulse again drives the memristor to an LRS with(red curve in Fig.3(d)). However, due to the smaller negative offset voltage, the memory time constant is too long to reset the memristor before the arrival of the next programming pulse. Note, that thevoltage division further decreases the portion of the negative offset voltage acting on the memristor (gray curve in Fig.3(d)), contributing to the increase of the memory time constant (Fig.3(e)) to the range of. The subsequent programming pulses drive the memristor resistance to even smaller values, further increasing the memory time constant. As a result, the memristor gets stuck in the LRS throughout the rest of the input stream.

In this simple example the negative offset voltage introduces a volatile short-term memory behavior in Fig.3(b), but this can be turned to a practically non-volatile response to the programming pulses and a related long-term memory operation by simply decreasing the offset voltage (Fig.3(d)). We utilize this concept to analyze more complex input streams by setting the negative offset voltage such that the desired temporal pattern drives the memristor to a long-term memory operation, whereas irrelevant patterns are rapidly forgotten.

The latter concept is simulated in Fig.3f, where the driving signal is a neural spike buried in large noise. This driving signal also includes a negative offset: the white dotted line shows the mean value of the noise, whereas the zero voltage is highlighted by the white solid line. Thiswas optimized such that the resistance of the memristor exhibits only a short-term excursion into a moderately low LRS upon receiving occasional, high-amplitude noise spikes embedded in the white noise input stream. However, when a Gaussian ‘neural spike’ with a comparable amplitude but longer duration arrives, a transition into a virtually permanent lower resistance state is triggered (see the red line). This demonstrates that the dynamics of the memristive signal detection circuit is sensitive to the ‘strength’ of the input signal both in the voltage and time domain: A transition from short-term to long-term memory operation can be induced not only by increasing the voltage amplitude at fixed length but also by increasing the length of the programming signal at a certain voltage amplitude. Thereby the memristor circuit is capable of reliable signal recognition also in situations where traditional voltage threshold-based trigger circuits are challenged by potential noise spikes of short duration but high amplitude.

The optimization of the memory time constant throughis similar to a supervised training: one can apply several input streams with and without neural spikes, and modifysuch that the detection accuracy of the neural spikes is maximized. A similar scheme is applicable to even more complex temporal information processing tasks, like time series prediction (Fig.1b): the negative offset values and the related memory time constants of the input channels are optimized for a training dataset in order to achieve maximized prediction accuracy, as will be discussed in Section 2.6.

SECTION: Pulse sequence and neural spike detection experiments.

The simulation results of the signal detection scheme were experimentally verified by using a single Ta2O5memristor and a=1 kseries resistor, as shown in Fig.4. Long- and short-term memory operation due to uniform, positive voltage pulses over a constant negative background are demonstrated in Fig.4(a) and (b), respectively. Here the peak values of the programming pulses as well as the initial conditions of the circuit are identical, except for the negative voltage offset which was changed from=-1.6 V (long-term memory) to=-2 V (short-term memory). The selectivity of the short-term / long-term response of the circuit to the programming voltage amplitude was tested by exposing it to the input pattern consisting of uniform programming pulses except for one which was 0.5 V higher in its peak value, as shown in Fig.4(c). Here, the negative offset is optimized to erase the long-term effect of sub-threshold pulses, but the third, higher pulse drives the system to a long-term memory state. This observation implies that the circuit can function as a detector module which recognizes super-threshold input signals by the transition into an enduring LRS of the Ta2O5memristor whereas sub-threshold signals only induce short-term, fully recovering resistance changes.

Neural spike detection in a noisy environment, as proposed by the simulations shown in Fig.3(f), has been tested experimentally by applying independent time series of identical white noise characteristics, a negative voltage offset and occasional neural spikes, i.e., Gaussian voltage pulses to the detector circuit. Example time traces of such input streams are illustrated in Fig.4(d), where every second sequence contains a Gaussian spike, as labeled by the arrows. The measured resistance response of the memristor, shown in Fig.4(e) verifies that the neural spikes always trigger the transition into an enduring LRS whereas random noise only results in quickly fading, smaller resistance changes. This contrast is better exemplified in Fig.4(f), where a selected single time trace contains both a higher-amplitude, short noise spike and a comparable amplitude, but longer lasting neural spike. The former induces a smaller magnitude, quickly fading resistance drop while the latter facilitates the transition to an enduring LRS.

For a statistical analysis 50-50 noisy time-series including/lacking a neural spike were experimentally evaluated by the detector circuit at nominally identical conditions, assuming an optimized. As successful detection events only those time series are considered which (i) contain a neural spike and only this spike is detected at its true position or (ii) there is no neural spike in the stream and none is detected, accordingly. The detection accuracy, defined as the ratio of the successfully classified streams was found to be 99% at 0.4 V pulse amplitude and 0.2 V rms noise (see Supplementary Discussion section S4 for similar analysis at different signal-to-noise ratios). According to the rms to peak-to-peak (pp) conversion of white noise, this rms value yields1.6V peak-to-peak fluctuations in 98% of the time. In comparison, an alternative approach based solely on the threshold switching property of metal-oxide memristors yielded in60% detection accuracy at1.7 V spike amplitude and 0.21 V rms / 1.1 V pp noise levels[36,37,38].

SECTION: Neural transceiver operation.

In order to add the transceiver functionality and automated reset to our Ta2O5-based neural spike detection circuit, we extend it by a VO2-based neural spike firing module and a global feedback loop, according to the blue shaded layout parts and the gray dashed arrow in Fig.2(d), respectively. The detailed circuit implementation is outlined in Supplementary Discussion section S3. First, we discuss the behavior of the zero-feedback circuit which actuates a firing output upon spike detection. Next, the global feedback is activated, completing the circuit operation with output optimization and automated reset.

Figures5(a-d) exemplify an experiment utilizing the input stream displayed in Fig.5(a), consisting of white noise, a single neural spike and a constant negative voltage offset. The strength of the neural spike and the negative voltage offset are adjusted such that the memory time constant of the detector circuit is in the order of100 ms, as shown in Fig.5(b). While the Ta2O5memristor resides in its LRS, the voltage drop on theseries resistor, arising from the constant negative, is increased in magnitude due to the voltage divider effect ofand. We utilize this voltage drop as the input signal of the VO2oscillator module. The coupling between the detector and oscillator modules is realized through a differential amplifier which sets the appropriate input level for the VO2circuit and also acts as a low-pass filter. This filtering implements an integration time constant that averages out the rapidly changing signal components, and practically measures the effect of the negative offset voltage on theseries resistor. The latter exhibits an order of magnitude increase upon the set transition of the Ta2O5memristor. While the Ta2O5memristor is in its HRS, the oscillation module is in its steady state, maintaining a constant, low-leveloutput current corresponding to the HRS of the VO2memristor. However, when the Ta2O5circuit detects a neural spike, the increased voltage input of the VO2circuit results in the firing of periodic current pulses, as shown in Fig.5(c). This so-called tonic spiking pattern, magnified in Fig.5(d) is explained in terms of the periodic charging and discharging of the parallel capacitordue to the current supplied throughand the voltage-induced current instability of the VO2memristor, respectively[26]. The conditions of the periodic firing are maintained as long as the fading LRS of the Ta2O5resides below a threshold, determined by,, the voltage gain of the coupling amplifier and thecharacteristics of the VO2memristor. The rise and fall times as well as the periodicity of the individualoutput current pulses are tunable via the,andcomponent values.

Finally, the neuro-transceiver circuit is completed by introducing the global feedback from its spiking output to the detector input. This is realized via a second differential amplifier such that the positive valued output spikes of the VO2module appear with a negative polarity in thedetector input stream. At the same time, they are amplified to a level where a single negative spike is sufficient to trigger the reset transition of the Ta2O5memristor in a short time compared to the repetition rate of the output spikes. As a result, the oscillator module is brought back to its steady state and the neuro-transceiver circuit is ready to receive, detect and flag the next neural input spike (see Supplementary Discussion section S3).

The reliable operation of the above scheme is experimentally demonstrated in Figs.5(e-g) where the circuit is exposed to 10 independent input streams consisting of white noise and a constant negative offset. The latter now incorporates a portion of the default output through the global feedback loop. Every second input sequence also contains a Gaussian neural spike, as shown by the black traces in Fig.5(e). The resistance response of the Ta2O5memristor is displayed in Fig.5(f) in red. During the input sequences lacking a neural signalstays in the HRS and the correspondingcurrent output of the VO2module, shown in Fig.5(e), also remains at a constant low level. However, whenever a neural spike arrives at the input,drops to the LRS, an output spike is triggered and the HRS ofis restored.
The set transition of(red) occurs instantaneously during the5 ms rise time of the neural spike (black). The output spike (blue) is fired 13 ms later. This delay corresponds to the elongated rise time of the detector module’s output at the firing module’s input due to the low-pass filter implemented in their coupling. The output spike simultaneously appears with a negative polarity at the input (black) through the feedback amplifier and facilitates the reset of the Ta2O5memristor and, thus, the whole circuit within 1 ms.

Note, that the time constant of the low-pass filter exceeds not only the one of the random fluctuations but also the duration of the neural spikes. This grants that neither the noise nor the neural spikes can directly trigger the firing of the VO2circuit. The latter is only facilitated by the set transition of the Ta2O5memristor, whose latching operation improves the reliability of the neuron circuit. Moreover, the filtering allows a longer ‘integration’ of the input stream by the detector circuit, resulting in higher detection accuracy. The cut-off frequency of the coupling and, thus, the integration time of the detector circuit are instrumentally optimized to suit the specific input pattern.

The statistical evaluation of the detection accuracy of the complete neuro-transceiver was carried out as described for the detector circuit in Section 2.3. In comparison to the latter, the experimentally verified detection accuracy was slightly decreased from 99% to 98% at comparable signal-to-noise ratio characterized by 0.5 V pulse amplitude and 0.22 V rms / 1.76 V pp noise levels. The additional detection failure was identified to arise from the partial set transition of the Ta2O5memristor at a true pulse detection event which was insufficient to access the oscillatory operation regime of the VO2memristor.

SECTION: Time-series prediction with two non-volatile Ta2O5memristors.

Finally, we move forward from temporal signal recognition and utilize our dynamical memristor circuits for time-series prediction. Memristive reservoirs were already utilized for various time-series prediction benchmark problems[18,39,40,41,19,27,28,29,42], like Logistic and Hénon maps, Mackey-Glass and Nonlinear Autoregressive Moving-average (NARMA) time series, and time-dependent Lorenz attractors. Common to these approaches is the use of a large number of memristors in the reservoir, or alternatively external processing or storage functionalities are applied to reduce the complexity of the reservoir itself. These include customized temporal rescaling of the inputs[18], preprocessing masks[39,40,27,28]or virtual nodes[39,40,19,27]for the partial storage of the memristors’ state-evolution in conventional memories. Depending on the actual arrangement, these memristive time-series prediction architectures include several tens or several hundreds of memristive elements in the reservoir. Here, we provide a proof-of-principle demonstration that a very simple architecture with only two memristive channels (Fig.1(b)) can already solve a relatively complex time-series prediction task, once the operation dynamics of the memristive channels can be tailored for the targeted problem.

For this purpose, we investigate the same NARMA2 benchmark nonlinear dynamical system which was used in the pioneering work of C. Du and coworkers[18], where a memristive reservoir computing layer of volatile WOxdevices performed the prediction task. This dynamical system relies on theequation[43], whereis theth output state of the system in response to the series ofuniformly distributed random inputs. Note, that this equation includes nonlinear functions and the actualoutput also depends on the previous and previous-to-previous output states (and). An example output stream of this dynamical equation is exemplified by the black solid line in Fig.6b.

The memristive dynamical network under test has to learn the operation of this dynamical system such, that it converts theinputs to apredicted output stream, which mimics the trueoutput. First a training is performed, where the parameters of the memristor circuit are tuned such, that thenormalized mean squared error is minimized for a training dataset. Afterwards, the optimized parameters of the memristive network are set and the system autonomously predicts the output of the dynamical system for any input pattern. This operation is characterized by the NMSEvalidationevaluated on a validation dataset.

In Ref.18a reservoir computing layer with 90 volatile WOxmemristors was utilized. These memristive units exhibited a non-tunable,ms memory time-constant. To scale theinput values to the optimal operation range of the memristive units alinear transformation was applied, which used the sameamplification andoffset for all the 90 memristive inputs. Furthermore, the input stream was fed to the memristive layer using 10 different temporal scaling factors. The latter temporal transformation artificially introduced a variation of the effective time constants. Thepredicted output of the memristive network was calculated as the linear combination of the individual memristive output states (memristor resistances) using 90 trainable weights and an additional offset value. At optimized parameters a normalized mean squared error of NMSEwas obtained on the training dataset. Finally, the prediction error was tested on an independent validation dataset yielding NMSE.

Our approach (see Fig.1(b) and Fig.6) relies on the dynamical operation of only two nonvolatile Ta/Ta2O5/Pt memristor units exploiting their tunable memory time constants. The driving scheme was similar to Fig.3a with the difference, that non-identical positive voltage pulses represented the input signal () to both memristors,
whereas a constant negative offset voltage was applied in-between the programming pulses
to facilitate forgetting. In practice, theuniformly distributed input random numbers were linearly scaled toanddriving pulse amplitudes by applying the samescaling factors for the two inputs (see Fig.6a) such that the input stream is properly adjusted to the operation range of the memristive units. The relaxation dynamics of the latter was intentionally de-tuned: the two forgetting time constants (and) were granted by different negative offset voltages (and, see Fig.6a). The outputs of the memristive circuits were read out as theandvoltage drops on theseries resistors. This can be done by introducing amV read voltage pulse between the programming pulse and the negative offset (see the full driving scheme in Fig. S5 of the Supplementary Discussion section S5). Theandvoltage values measured during the read pulse are fed directly into the readout layer.
Finally, the predicted output is calculated as a linear combination of the output voltages using two weights and an offset (,,, see Fig.6a).
The latter step was completed in software.

During the experimental demonstration, first a training dataset withrandom numbers () was fed to the system. The individual voltage responsesandwere measured at various offset parameters systematically scanning the physically relevantrange withresolution for both memristive units. At a certain offset value pair the adjustable parameters of the read-out linear combination (,,) were optimized in software such that the best NMSE is obtained at the given hardware parameter set. Finally, the globally best setting was selected by choosing the hardware parameter set at which the overlall best NMSEwas obtained.

To validate the trained system, the prediction accuracy was evaluated on an independent validation dataset () with the best performing training parameters, obtaining NMSE. This is demonstrated in Fig.6b, where the red circles exhibit thepredicted data in comparison to the trueresponse.
These NMSE values represent a similar predictive performance to Ref.18using significantly less physical units and tunable system parameters. Further details, including the training and validation input streams, the training data, the best performing system parameters, and further optimization possibilities are available in the Supplementary Discussion section S5.

These results show that a very simple dynamical layer with only two nonvolatile memristors is sufficient to predict a complex dynamical system with high accuracy. Such a minimal number of hardware components is enabled by the wide tunability of the system dynamics through the independent adjustment of the forgetting time of each unit.
This way the system parameters can be efficiently customized to hardware-encode the solver of the targeted dynamical problem. This is in contrast to reservoir layers relying on non-tunable, hardware-defined dynamical properties lacking the adaptability to the problem, necessitating software-based solutions such as the off-line temporal re-scaling of the input data. Consequently, our architecture allows real-time hardware operation, provided that the read-out weights are also hardware-implemented with memristive artificial synapses. Adding additional input channels is nonetheless straightforward, if the complexity of the task requires even more individually tunable dynamical channels.

SECTION: IIIConclusion

In conclusion, we have demonstrated an information processing scheme, where a nonvolatile memristor is programmed by positive voltage patterns whereas a negative offset voltage induces forgetting. This driving pattern, together with the use of a series resistor, enables a broad tunability of the resistive switching dynamics, including adjustable transition between short- and long-term memory operation. We have shown that with this approach, a single memristior is sufficient for performing temporal signal recognition tasks such as discriminating between sub-threshold and super-threshold voltage pulses or detecting neural voltage spikes in noisy environment.

If an additional input module (another nonvolatile memristor and another series resistor) is added, the two memristors can be sensitized to different dynamical aspects of the input signal stream and, accordingly, more complex temporal patterns can be analyzed. With this architecture, we have achieved high-accuracy time-series prediction. The adjustable dynamical properties were exploited in the training phase. As a result, the simplistic circuit consisting of only two memristors, two series resistors and a suitably chosen linear combination of the individual output voltages was able to predict the output of a benchmark dynamical system with high accuracy.

We emphasize, that the relaxation time constant towards the HRS is not an entirely hardware-encoded physical property in our scheme. Instead, the forgetting rate can be adjusted by the negative offset voltage. Here, we investigated the voltage dependence of the switching speed over a limited frequency range (Hz-kHz, see Supplementary Figure S1c,d). However, our high-frequency study on similarly prepared Ta2O5memristors revealed set (reset) times down to 10 ps (300 ps) with a clear voltage-dependent switching times at these extreme speeds[3]. This can extend our signal analysis scheme by up to 10 orders of magnitude in the time domain, in contrast to those reservoir computing solutions where a fixed or less tunable physical relaxation time constant is utilized. We believe that the straightforward extension of our system with an arbitrary number of independently adjustable input modules offers a versatile platform for a wide range of temporal signal analysis tasks.

Furthermore, we have shown that our temporal signal analysis scheme can be extended with additional hardware components that post-process the output of the nonvolatile memristor layer. To this end, we coupled the oscillator circuit of a volatile VO2Mott memristor to the output of the non-volatile Ta2O5memristor. Thereby we implemented a complete neuro-transceiver unit which detects a neural spike buried in high noise, emits a high-amplitude neural spike upon detection, and resets the input detector layer in a fully autonomous manner.

With these results, we demonstrate that simplistic memristive circuits with very few components can efficiently solve high-complexity temporal signal processing tasks, once the rich dynamical properties of the memristors are flexibly exploited. This possibility offers highly compact and efficient building blocks for those edge computing tasks where energy-hungry software solutions must be avoided.

SECTION: Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the Ministry of Culture and Innovation and the National Research, Development and Innovation Office within the Quantum Information National Laboratory of Hungary (Grant No. 2022-2.1.1-NL-2022-00004), and the NKFI K143169, K143282 and TKP2021-NVA-03 grants. Project no. 963575 has been implemented with the support provided by the Ministry of Culture and Innovation of Hungary from the National Research, Development and Innovation Fund, financed under the KDP-2020 funding scheme. L.P. and Z.B. acknowledge the the support of the Bolyai János Research Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. J.L., M.C. and N.J.O. acknowledge the financial support of the Werner Siemens Stiftung.

SECTION: Author contributions

The Ta2O5-based temporal signal recognition experiments were developed and performed by D.M. The experiments with the combined Ta2O5and VO2circuit were carried out by D.M., T.N.T. and R.K. The time-series prediction measurements were performed and analyzed by D.M. and J.V.Jr. The simulations were initiated by the work of P.B. and were extended and finalized by D.M. The Ta2O5memristors were developed and fabricated by M.C. and N.J.O. in the group of J.L. The VO2thin layers were manufactured and optimized by G.M. and J.V., the VO2devices were developed and manufactured by L.P., and T.N.T. in the group of J.V.. The project was conceived and supervised by A.H. The manuscript was written by M.C, D.M., T.N.T. and A.H. with contributions from Z.B. All authors contributed to the discussion of the results.

SECTION: Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

SECTION: References