SECTION: 1Introduction

The simplest AdS superspace in four dimensions,,
was introduced in the early years of supersymmetry by Keck[2]and Zumino[3]as the coset superspace111We remind the reader thatis the double covering group of the connected component of the Lorentz group,.

and the thorough study of general superfield representations onwas given by Ivanov and Sorin[4]. It was also realised thatoriginates as a maximally supersymmetric solution in the following off-shell formulations forsupergravity:
(i) the old minimal supergravity[5,6,7,8]with a cosmological term[9],
see[10,11]for a review; and (ii) the non-minimal AdS supergravity[12].

The group-theoretic realisation (1.1) ofAdS superspace has a natural extension to thecase (see, e.g.,[13])

The description ofas a maximally supersymmetric solution in the
minimal off-shell formulation forsupergravity
with a cosmological term, developed by de Wit, Philippe and Van Proeyen[14],
was given in[15,16,17].222Puresupergravity in four dimensions was constructed by Ferrara and van Nieuwenhuizen in 1976[18], and puresupergravity with a cosmological term was constructed by Freedman and Das[19].

The conformal flatness of AdS4|4was first established in[4], and it was later re-derived in textbooks[10,11]within the supergravity framework.
The superconformal flatness ofwas demonstrated in[20]for arbitrary.
Alternative proofs of the conformal flatness ofwere given in[16,21]using the off-shellsupergravity framework. Ref.[22]described different conformally flat realisations for AdS4|4and AdS4|8which are based on the use of Poincaré coordinates.

In the non-supersymmetric case, there exist two different
but equivalent realisations of AdSd:
(i) as the coset space; and (ii) as
a hypersurface in

Both realisations of AdSdhave found numerous applications in the literature.
As regards, only the coset superspace realisation (1.2)
had existed for many years.
The supertwistor and bi-supertwistor formulations forhave recently been developed[1].
Analogous results in three dimensions have been derived in[1,23].
In this paper we elaborate on the superembedding formalism333For a pedagogical review of superembeddings see[24,25].for.

Since the work by Ferber[26], supertwistors have found numerous applications in theoretical and mathematical physics. In particular,
supertwistor realisations of compactified-extended Minkowski superspaces
have been developed in four[27,28]and three[29,30]dimensions, and their harmonic/projective extensions have been derived[31,32,29,33,34,35,36,30,37].444Similar ideas were applied in Ref.[38]to develop
supertwistor realisations of the-extended supersphere,
with, as a homogeneous space of the three-dimensional
Euclidean superconformal group.Recently, supertwistor formulations for conformal supergravity theories in diverse dimensions have been proposed[39,40].
To the best of our knowledge, the supertwistor realisations of AdS superspaces in three and four dimensions have been given only in[1,23], although
(super)twistor descriptions of (super)particles in AdS spaces had been studied in the literature earlier[41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50](see also[51]).555We are grateful to Alex Arvanitakis for
bringing Ref.[51]to our attention.

This paper is organised as follows. In section2we give a brief review of the (bi)supertwistor description of AdS4|4Nand present a manifestlyinvariant model for a superparticle in.
Section3is devoted to presenting a novel realisation of the AdS supergroup, which is then used in section4to develop a coset construction for. The coset construction is applied in section5to work out the differential geometry of.
In section6, by employing the framework of conformal superspace, we describe the most general conformally flat supergeometry and then specialise our construction to the case of.
The main body of the paper is accompanied by several technical appendices.
AppendixAincludes essential definitions concerning the supergroupand corresponding supertwistors.
AppendixBprovides a review of the conformally flat atlas for AdSd.
In appendixC, we spell out the-extended superconformal algebra.

Our two-component spinor notation and conventions follow[11], and are similar to those adopted in[52]. The only difference is that the spinor Lorentz generatorsandused in[11]have an extra minus sign as compared with[52],
specificallyand.

SECTION: 2The (bi)supertwistor description of AdS4|4N

In this section we give a brief review of the construction of[1]. The reader is referred to appendixAfor the technical details concerning the supergroupand supertwistors.

Associated with the space of even complex supertwistors,,
is a Grassmannian of even two-planes.
Given such a two-plane, it is spanned by two even supertwistors,

The property ofbeing a two-plane means that the bosonic bodies ofandare linearly independent complex four-vectors.
An arbitrary elementis a linear combination, with the coefficientsbeing even elements of the Grassmann algebra.
By construction, the supertwistors (2.1) are defined modulo the equivalence relation

since bothanddefine the same two-plane.

We restrict our attention to the subset of those two-planes which satisfy the constraints

Here (2.3a) refers to the body of thesupermatrix, anddenotes the conjugate of a pure supertwistor, see eq. (A.27).
The conditions (2.3) imply that the bodies of the four even supertwistorsform a basis for, in particular the supertwistors (2.1) generates a two-plane.
We emphasise that the conditions (2.3) are invariant under the equivalence transformations (2.2).
In what follows, the supertwistorwill be denoted.

We say that any pair of even supertwistors, eq. (2.1),
constrained by the conditions (2.3) constitutes a frame.
The space of frames will be denoted. The supergroupacts onby the rule

This group action is naturally extended to the quotient space. The latter proves to be a homogeneous space of, which was identified in[1]with the AdS superspace,

Given two frames,
one can construct the following-invariant two-point functions:

witha fixed positive parameter.
They do not change ifandare replaced by their equivalent frames (2.2), and therefore these-invariant two-point functions are well defined on. In the non-supersymmetric case,, the three two-point functions (2.6) coincide.

Given a point in, we associate with it the graded antisymmetric matrices

These supermatrices are invariant under arbitrary equivalence transformations (2.2),
and therefore they may be used to parametrise AdS4|4N.
The bi-supertwistors (2.7) have the following properties:

wheredenotes the graded antisymmetric
part of.
Using the results of[36], the bi-supertwistor description of AdS4|4Ndefined by (2.8) may be shown to be equivalent to the supertwistor one described earlier.

Restricting the above bi-supertwistor realisation of AdS4|4Nto thecase gives the bi-twistor formulation of AdS4, which in turn
leads to a standard embedding formalism for AdS4. Building on the analysis given in section 3.3 of[1], it may be used to derive the reality condition

Hereanddenote
the-traceless parts ofand, respectively,

Associated withis areal5-vector

Herearerealmatrices which obey the anti-commutation relations

and are characterised by the property

The explicit realisation ofis given, e.g., in[30].
Making use of the completeness relation

we obtain

It may be shown that the bi-twistor description of AdS4is equivalent to the bi-spinor formalism introduced in[53].

Since the two-point functions (2.6) are invariant under arbitrary equivalence transformations (2.2), they can be expressed in terms of the bi-supertwistors
(2.7). In terms of the supermatricesanddefined by

these expressions have the form:

We point out that thetransformation (2.4) acts onandas follows

The bi-supertwistor realisation described above facilitates the construction of manifestlyinvariant models.
Indeed, let us consider the following worldline action for a superparticle on AdS4|4N

whereparametrises the world line,denotes the einbein,is a real dimensionless parameter, andis a mass parameter. We can see that in the non-supersymmetric case,,
the-term is absent,
since the three two-point functions (2.6) coincide.

SECTION: 3Isomorphic realisation of the AdS supergroup

The supergrouppossesses an alternative realisation,
which we introduce below and which turns out to be useful for applications.
There is a simple motivation to look for such a realisation. To explain it, we consider the non-supersymmetric case,. It follows from (2.3a)
that for every frame

thematricesandare non-zero. In the framework of the coset construction, however, it would be useful to deal with an isomorphic realisation ofthat would allow a frame such that eitheror.

Let us consider a supergroup, denoted,
consisting of
all evensupermatricessubject to the following constraints:

Here we have introduced the graded antisymmetricsupermatrix

with

In what follows, we will denote the components of the matrices (3.12) asand, which is why we prefer to use
the notationinstead of.

The supergroupproves to be isomorphic to.
The proof is based on considering the following supermatrix correspondence:

for every supertwistor. Here the supermatrixis defined as

It obeys the useful properties:

and

These conditions imply that

Associated withare two invariant inner products defined as

for arbitrary pure supertwistorsand.
The conditions (3.4) impose restrictions on the blocks of. For

these are:

and

In the original realisation ofthe reality condition could be realised as the coincidence of the supertranspose and the Hermitian conjugate, eq. (A.26b).
For our new realisation of the supergroup,
(A.26b) is replaced with the following condition

From this we have the following conditions

We will now discuss involution for the supertwistors. Since the transformation (3.13b) applies to every supertwistor, we can also consider it applied to. We have

This acts explicitly on a supertwistoras

The components ofare given by

Let us introduce a new operation, denoted by, by removing the factor ofin (3.37):

The components ofare given by

We therefore have the following reality condition with respect to the map

The mapis an involution, since it satisfies the property

We also observe that

which, in conjunction with the properties (3.20), yields the following

It is useful to express the constraints (2.3), the two-point functions (2.6), and the bi-supertwistors (2.7) in terms of the new realisation of the supergroup.
The constraints can be expressed as

For the two-point functions we find

The bi-supertwistors (2.7) can be expressed in terms of transformed supertwistorsas follows

They satisfy the following properties

For the case, the-traceless parts of the bi-supertwistors take the form

As before, we can express the two-point functions (3.52) in terms of the supermatricesanddefined by

They then take the form

SECTION: 4Coset construction

The alternative realisation of the AdS supergroup described in the previous section is ideal for developing a coset construction for.
To start with, it is worth recalling some basic definitions, see e.g.[54]for more details. Consider a homogeneous space, whereis a Lie group andis the isotropy subgroup (or stabiliser) of some point. A global coset representative is a bijective mapsuch that, wheredenotes the natural (canonical) projection. For many homogeneous spaces, no global coset representative exists.
In such a case, local coset representativeswith the propertycan be introduced on open chartsthat provide an atlas for. In the intersection of two chartsand,,
the corresponding coset representativesandare related by a little group transformation,, with.

SECTION: 4.1Isotropy subgroup

As a marked (preferred) pointof AdS4|4N, we choose

The stabiliserofconsists of those elementsof the AdS supergroupwhich satisfy the conditions

These conditions imply that

Thus the stability subgroupis isomorphic to

The bi-supertwistors (3.53) corresponding to the preferred pointtake the form

SECTION: 4.2Generalised coset representative

The freedom to perform arbitrary equivalence transformations (2.2)
can be used to fine-tune the conditions (3.51) to

for a fixed positive parameter. Such a frame is said to be normalised.
Under the condition (4.22a), the equivalence relation
(2.2) turns into

The space of normalised frames will be denoted.
Along with the definition (2.5) given earlier,
the-extended AdS superspace can equivalently be defined as, where the equivalence relation is given by (4.23).

The conditions (4.22) can be recast in terms of the two-plane

and imply the following constraints:

Relation (4.28a) tells us that at least one of thematricesandis nonsingular.

Associated with the normalised two-planeis the following group element

The fundamental property ofis that, for any normalised two-plane.
We point out thatis symmetric,. The functional forms of the matricesandare fixed through the conditionand
the reality conditions (3.29a) and (3.29c).
The remaining blocks are then fixed by the group requirements (3.26) and (3.27).
It is possible to obtain alternate expressions for the blocksand, which may be more suited to performing calculations. They take the following form

These expressions can be seen to coincide with (4.29i) and (4.29j) by using the group requirements and the general form for the inverse of a supermatrix.

The group elementis characterised by the property

with. This relation means thatis not a genuine coset representative that is used in
the coset construction.
However,will allow us to obtain a coset representative if we pick a single two-plane in each equivalence class.
This may be readily done in coordinate charts for.

SECTION: 4.3AdS space ()

As noted above,
at least one of thematricesand, see eq. (4.27), is nonsingular.
Therefore we can naturally introduce two coordinate charts forthat provide an atlas. We define the north chart to consist of all normalised two-planes with. Similarly, the south chart is defined to consist of all normalised two-planes with.

In the north chart, we can use the freedom (4.23)
to choose, and then

whereis a parameter, andare the Pauli matrices. The constraints (4.28a) and (4.28b) give, respectively,

It follows thatis real and. We also observe that. Since there is still a remnant of the equivalence relation
(4.23),,
it can be used to fix. Then we observe that the coordinate chart
is specified by

and the parameteris given by

The real coordinatesparametrise AdS4in the north chart.
Direct calculation of the two-point function (3.52a) in this chart yields

In the south chart, the gauge freedom (4.23) can be used
to choose,
and then

for some parameter. Now, repeating the north-chart analysis
tells us that the local coordinatesare real, and the following relations hold:

The two-point function (3.52a) in the south chart is

In the intersection of the two charts, the transition functions are

It follows that.
Comparing the above relations with those described in appendixB,
we find complete agreement except for the sign difference (4.47) and (B.10).

SECTION: 4.4

The analysis of the previous subsection can be extended to the supersymmetric case in a similar fashion.
Let us consider the north chart in which the matrixin (4.27)
is nonsingular. The
equivalence relation (4.23)
can once again be used to
choose, and then

Making use of (4.22) leads to the relations

The former is solved by

We see that the two-planes (4.51) are parametrised by the chiral coordinatesand, with.

The coset representative in the north chart is given by

The two-point function (3.52a) computed in the north chart yields

where

In the non-supersymmetric case,, this reduces to
(4.41).

In the south chart, the gauge freedom (4.23) can be used to fix. Repeating the analysis of the north chart leads to

with

The former is solved by

We see that the two-planes in the south chart (4.60) are parametrised by the chiral coordinatesand, with.

The coset representative in the south chart is given by

The two-point function (3.52a) computed in the south chart yields

where

In the intersection of the two charts, the transition functions are given by

In addition, the two coset representatives (4.54c) and (4.63c) are related in the intersection by the point-dependent little group transformation

Explicitly,is given by

We see thatis chiral, through the transition functions (4.66).

So far we have only considered the form of the two-planes in the north and south charts. It is also useful to describe the form of the bi-supertwistors (3.53) in an explicit coordinate system. In the north chart they take the form

It is of interest to compare this supermatrix with a similar result for compactified-extended Minkowski superspace, see eq. (3.17) in[36].

SECTION: 5Superspace geometry

In this section we give explicit expressions for the vierbein, connection, torsion tensor and curvature tensor. From these expressions the graded commutation relations of the covariant derivatives can be derived.

SECTION: 5.1Geometric structures in AdS4|4N

Let us denote bythe superalgebra of the AdS supergroup, and bythe algebra of the stability group (4.14).
Letbe the complement ofin,.
The superalgebraconsists of even supermatrices

with.
The elementstake the form

Additionally, the elementstake the form

With the following row-vector definition

the elements (5.12) take the form

It is straightforward to verify.

We may uniquely decompose the Maurer-Cartan one-formas a sum, whereis the vierbein taking its values in.
The Maurer-Cartan one-form is

where the blocks are given by

One can make use of the group conditions (3.26) to recastin an equivalent form

In the above,is given by

The Maurer-Cartan one-form (5.22) can be decomposed into supermatrices of the form (5.8) and (5.19) to obtain the vierbein and connection.
The connection is

where

It is possible that these expressions may be simplified by using an explicit form for, withgiven by (4.29f), however the above expressions appear most convenient for proving the required properties

The vierbein is

where

andis defined as in (5.23f) or (5.24).
It is straightforward to show that (5.42) is Hermitian, using (4.28b).

Using the above expressions we can now compute the torsionand curvature. In accordance with the coset construction, they are defined as follows:

There exists another simple expression for bothand, given by

Following (5.43), the torsion is given by

where

The curvature is given by

where

SECTION: 5.2Covariant derivatives

The vierbein and connection (as well as curvature and torsion) can be decomposed into the bases corresponding to the superalgebraand the algebra.
Accordingly, we must introduce a basisfor the superalgebraand a basisfor the algebra.
The elementsofandof, given by (5.8) and (5.12), may be written as a linear combination of generators

Making use of (5.8) and (5.12)
allows us to read off the graded commutation relations for
the generators ofand

These relations constitute the-extended AdS superalgebra.

The vierbein and the torsion two-form, as elements of, can be decomposed with respect to the basis as

to obtain the one-formand the the torsion.
A similar procedure follows for the curvature. We may further decompose the torsion and curvature components as

Building on the approach used in[55], we can use (5.44) and the graded commutation relations (5.55) to determine the non-vanishing components of the torsion and curvature to be

These components can be used to construct the graded commutation relations of the covariant derivatives

The algebra of covariant derivatives is thus given by

SECTION: 5.3AdS superspace

Many of the expressions in subsection5.1containand. These are, in principle, expressible in terms of,, and. These expressions are, however,-dependent. Below, we will discuss both of these in thecase.

Using the group requirements (3.26a) we can rearrange for

which in thecase yields the following expression

where

Furthermore,has the explicit solution

We can use these expressions to computefrom the vierbein (5.23f). Forit is

where

This expression coincides with (5.27) when considered in thecase.

SECTION: 5.4North and south charts

The results of subsections5.1,5.2and5.3did not make use of the freedom (4.23) to fix a coordinate system. In this section we will use these results to describe the geometry in thecase for the north and south charts, given by two-planes of the form (4.51) and (4.60).

In the north chart, the vierbein (5.41) reads

whereis computed using (5.69) as

In the above,andare the flatsuperspace vielbeins.
The general forms for the vielbeins of a superspace with superconformally flat geometry are

whereis chiral (antichiral).
In our case it is straightforward to compute the coefficients in (5.75), which yields the following expression

Indeed, (5.73) can be shown to take the form

withandgiven by (5.75). The connection is given by

where the components of the connection read

We
introduce the inverseof the vielbein supermatrix,

Let us then define the vector fields

Hereare theflat superspace covariant derivatives.
We find

The components of the connectionwere given with respect to the basisin (5.85).
Using the inverse vierbein defined by (5.86), the connection can be decomposed into the basis, with which we can then construct explicit expressions for the covariant derivatives

They take the following form

The expressions (5.90) can be seen to coincide with the general form for the covariant derivatives of a conformally flat superspace.

In the south chart, the vierbein (5.41) is given by

whereis

We showed in section4.4that the coset representatives in the north and south charts were related by a little group transformation, see (4.67).
Under such a transformation, the vierbein and connection transform as follows

We can see then that the vierbein supermatrix in the north chart is related to that in the south chart by

which yields

withgiven by (4.68e).
The vector fieldsare also related in the intersection of the two charts. We find

SECTION: 6Conformally flat supergeometry

This section is devoted to a description of the most general four-dimensional conformally flat supergeometry. Our approach will be to begin with a general conformally flat superspace whose local structure group is the superconformal group.666Such a supergeometry is known as a conformal superspace. They may also be employed to describe non-conformally flat supergeometries, see e.g.[56,57]for more details.Then, by performing a series of gauge fixings, and passing through the conventionalandsuperspaces, we realise thesupergeometry within this framework.

SECTION: 6.1Conformal superspace: conformally flat geometry

We consider a conformally flat-extended
superspace, parametrised by local coordinates, where,,and.
The structure group is chosen to be, the-extended superconformal group.
Its corresponding Lie superalgebra,, is spanned by the translation, Lorentz,-symmetryand, dilatation, and the special conformalgenerators, see appendixCfor more details.
The geometry of this superspace is encoded within the conformally covariant derivatives, which take the form:

wheredenotes the inverse supervielbein and the remaining superfields are connections associated with the non-translational generators of the superconformal group.

By definition, the gauge group of conformal supergravity is generated by local transformations of the form

where the gauge parameters satisfy natural reality conditions. Given a conformally covariant tensor superfield(with its indices suppressed), it transforms under such transformations as follows:

In general, the algebra of covariant derivativesshould be constrained such that it: (i) has a super Yang-Mills structure; and (ii) is expressed solely in terms of a single superfield, the super-Weyl tensor. In this section, we will restrict our attention to conformally flat backgrounds, which are characterised by vanishing super-Weyl tensor. As a result, the only non-vanishing sector ofis

SECTION: 6.2Degauging (i):superspace

According to eq. (6.2), under an infinitesimal special superconformal gauge transformation, the dilatation connection transforms as follows

Thus, it is possible to impose the gauge, which completely fixes
the special superconformal gauge freedom.777There is a class of residual gauge transformations which preserve this gauge. They generate the super-Weyl transformations of the degauged geometry.As a result, the corresponding connection is no longer required for the covariance ofunder the residual gauge freedom and
may be
extracted from,

Here the operatorinvolves only the Lorentz and-symmetry connections

The next step is to relate the special superconformal connectionto the torsion tensor associated with. To do this, one can make use of the relation

In conjunction with (6.4), this relation leads to a set of consistency conditions that are equivalent to the Bianchi identities of (conformally flat)superspace[58].
Their solution expresses the components ofin terms of the torsion
tensor ofsuperspace and completely determines the algebra.

We begin by solving eq. (6.8) in thecase. The outcome of this analysis is:

Hereis a chiral scalar superfield

We now pause and comment on the geometry described by. In particular, by employing (6.8) one arrives at the following anti-commutation relation

It follows that if one performs the shift

then the-dependent terms in (6.11) vanish.
The resulting algebra of covariant derivatives, up to dimension-, takes the form

which describes asuperspace[58,10]with vanishing super-Weyl tensor.

Above we made use of the special conformal gauge freedom to degauge from conformal tosuperspace. Now, we will show that the residual dilatation symmetry manifests in the latter as super-Weyl transformations. To preserve the gauge, every local dilatation transformation should be accompanied by a compensating special conformal one

This is the case only if the special conformal parameter is

We now determine what transformation ofand the torsions ofsuperspace this induces. They may be determined by making use of the following relation

Specifically, one finds that the super-Weyl transformations of the degauged geometry are:

which are in agreement with the ones presented in[59]. Additionally, for infinitesimal, these transformations may be obtained from the ones presented in[58].

We now extend the analysis presented above to thecase. A routine calculation leads to the following expressions for the degauged special conformal connection:

The dimension-1 superfields introduced above have the following symmetry properties:

and satisfy the reality conditions

Thecharges of the complex fields are:

Now, by employing (6.8), we find that the anti-commutation relations for the spinor covariant derivatives are:

At the same time, the consistency conditions arising from solving (6.8) lead to the Bianchi identities:

Now, in complete analogy with thestory described above, we show how the residual dilatation symmetry of conformal superspace manifests in the present geometry as super-Weyl transformations. It may be shown that the following combined dilatation and special conformal transformation, parametrised by a dimensionless real scalar superfield=, preserves the gauge:

At the level of the degauged geometry, this induces the following super-Weyl transformations

where we have made the definitions:

In the infinitesimal case, these transformations are a special case of the ones presented in[58].888Recently, the super-Weyl transformations of-extended superspace have been computed within a local supertwistor formulation approach, see[40]for more details.Further, for, these may be read off from the finite super-Weyl transformations presented in[60].

SECTION: 6.3Degauging (ii):superspace

In the preceeding subsection we have shown that the degauging of the-extended conformally flat supergeometry described in section6.1leads to (conformally flat)superspace. The latter is characterised by the property that its local structure group is. In the present section we will further degauge this geometry by breaking the local-symmetry group down to.

This procedure consists of the following steps. First, one must eliminate thecurvature. This involves redefiningto absorb such terms in the algebra of covariant derivatives and employing super-Weyl transformations to set the remaining contributions, which describe purely gauge degrees of freedom, to zero. For, this role is played by the chiral spinor, while in thecase,should be gauged away. Next, by performing some localtransformation one may always set, and so the local-symmetry group has been reduced to. Finally, one must identify the class of residual combined super-Weyl and localtransformations preserving this geometry. As will be shown below, such transformations are parametrised by a dimensionless chiral scalar(and its conjugate).

As pointed out above, the spinoris the chiral field strength
of an Abelian vector multiplet and describes purely gauge degrees of freedom. By employing the super-Weyl transformatons (6.17f)
it is possible to fix the gauge

By inspecting the algebra of covariant derivatives (6.13), it is clear this leads to vanishingcurvature. Hence, in this gauge theconnectionmay also be gauged away

Then, the algebra of covariant derivatives (6.13) reduces to

which describes a conformally flat GWZ geometry[61]. This algebra should be accompanied by the constraints (6.10), provided one sets.

Equation (6.17f) tells us that imposing the conditiondoes not fix completely the super-Weyl freedom. The residual transformations are generated
by parameters of the form

However, in order to preserve thegauge,
every residual super-Weyl transformation (6.30) must be accompanied by the following compensatingtransformation

This leads to the transformations:

In the infinitesimal limit, these transformations may be obtained from the ones given in[62].

As discussed above, in thecase, the torsiondescribes purely gauge degrees of freedom.
Thus, by employing the super-Weyl freedom described by eq. (6.25), it may be gauged away

In this gauge, it is natural to shiftas follows:

Then, by making use of (6.22), we find that these covariant derivatives obey the algebra:

In thecase this algebra of covariant derivatives coincides with conformally flat limit of the one derived by Grimm[63]. It should be pointed out, however, that no discussion of super-Weyl transformations was given in[63]. As a result, the setup of[63]is insufficient to describe conformal supergravity. These transformations were later computed in[15].

The geometric superfields appearing above obey the Bianchi identities (6.23) (upon imposing (6.33)). Now, by examining equations (6.35), we see that thecurvature has been eliminated and therefore the corresponding connection
is flat. Consequently, it may be set to zero via an appropriate localtransformation;. As a result, the gauge group reduces to. Hence, we will refer to this supergeometry as conformally flatsuperspace.

It turns out that the gauge conditions (6.33) andallow for residual super-Weyl transformations, which are described
by a parameterconstrained by

The general solution of this condition is

where the parameteris covariantly chiral, with zerocharge, but otherwise arbitrary.
To preserve the gauge condition, every super-Weyl transformation, eq. (6.25), must be accompanied by the following compensatingtransformation

As a result, the algebra of covariant derivatives of (conformally flat)superspace is preserved by the following set of super-Weyl transformations:

Forcase these transformations are a special case of the ones given in[15]. It is important to point out that forthe chiral parameterand its conjugateappear in (6.39) only in the real combination.

In the case that, the covariant derivatives of-extended Minkowski superspace, the relations (6.39)
provide a conformally flat realisation for an arbitrary conformally flat superspace.

SECTION: 6.4Degauging (iii):-extended AdS superspace

As an application of the superspace geometries sketched above, we now show how the-extended AdS supergeometry may be described withinsuperspace.
Such a supergeometry is characterised by the following conditions:

(i) the torsion and curvature tensors are Lorentz invariant;

(ii) the torsion and curvature tensors are covariantly constant.

These conditions imply the following relations:

Keeping in mind these constraints, the algebra obeyed byreduces to the following:

with the identificationwhen. Additionally, in thecase, one may impose the reality conditionby performing some rigidphase transformation.
Then, the resulting geometry coincides with the one of[16]. We will not impose this reality condition below.

When, the constraintimplies the following integrability condition999In thecase, a solution to eq. (6.42) is the reality condition.

This means that, by performing a localtransformation,101010Strictly speaking, this should be performed within thesuperspace of section6.2, though it is also sufficient to introduce a flatconnection.one can bringto the form

though it should be emphasised that our frame will no longer be conformally flat. Asis theinvariant tensor, it follows that the-symmetry group reduces to. The former may then be utilised to raise and lower indices in accordance with the rule

Further, upon inspection of (6.41), the-symmetry generators only appear in the algebra of covariant derivatives via the combination

Thegeneratormay be shown to act on isospinors as follows

The resulting algebra of covariant derivatives is as follows:

This algebra coincides with the one presented in eq. (5.60) provided one fixes, which indicates that, for, the latter also does not describe a conformally flat frame. This will be elaborated on in a forthcoming work.

We now relax the constraint (6.43) and provide a manifestly conformally flat realisation of AdS superspace. By definition, a conformally flat supergeometry may be related to a flat one by performing some super-Weyl transformation. In the case of AdS superspace, this means that the curved covariant derivativesare related to those of Minkowski superspace, see eq. (6.39), as follows:

As compared with[20], our work provides an alternative proof of the conformal flatness of-extended AdS superspace. It should also be pointed out that the logarithm of the chiral parameter, which was defined in equations (4.51) and (4.52), is proportional to;. Further, incase, they are related via eq. (5.76).

SECTION: 7Conclusion

This work has completed the construction of the embedding formalism forinitiated in[1]. In the original realisation[1], superspace Poincaré coordinates forare naturally introduced, and therefore that realisation is well suited for AdS/CFT calculations in the spirit of[53].
The novel realisation of the-extended AdS supergroup, which has been introduced in this paper, is more suitable for the coset construction,

The AdS superparticle model (2.19) is one of the main results of this paper. Settingin (2.19) gives a unique AdS extension of the model for a massive superparticle in Minkowski superspace. In terms of the local coordinates in the north chart described in subsection4.4, the kinetic terms have the form

where the one-formis defined in (4.56).
In the non-supersymmetric case,, the-term is absent.
Therefore, forthe-term does not contain purely bosonic contributions.
It may be checked that the-term contains a higher-derivative contribution
proportional to.
Thus our superparticle model (2.19) may be viewed as an AdS analogue of the Volkov-Pashnev model[64].111111We are grateful to Dmitri Sorokin for bringing the references[64,65]to our attention.In-extended Minkowski superspace, forit was possible to add a fermionic WZ-like term to the superparticle action[65]. Such structures are more difficult to generate in the AdS case.

In this paper we have also provided descriptions of the most general conformally flat-extended supergeometry in four dimensions. Specifically, we have realised this geometry in three different superspace frameworks: (i) conformal superspace; (ii)superspace; and (iii)superspace. Additionally, we computed the finite super-Weyl transformations within theandsuperspaces. As an application of this construction, we utilised it to obtain a new realisation forand describe the specific super-Weyl transformation (6.48) required to ‘boost’ to this superspace from a flat one.

Acknowledgements:We are grateful to Alex Arvanitakis, Dmitri Sorokin and Gabriele Tartaglino-Mazzucchelli for discussions. SMK is grateful to the organisers of the CQUeST-APCTP Workshop “Gravity beyond Riemannian Paradigm” (Jeju Island, South Korea)
where part of this work was completed, for the fantastic scientific atmosphere and generous support. He also acknowledges kind hospitality and generous support extended to him during his research stay at KIAS, Seoul. The work of SMK and ESNR is supported in part by the Australian Research Council, projects DP200101944 and DP230101629.
The work of NEK is supported by the Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship.

SECTION: Appendix AThe supergroupand supertwistors

In this appendix we collect essential definitions concerning the supergroupwhich has two different but related origins in supersymmetric field theory:
(i) as
the-extended superconformal group in three dimensions; and
(ii) as
the-extended AdS supergroup in four dimensions. We start by discussing the complex supergroupof whichis a real form.

The supergroupnaturally acts on the space ofevensupertwistors and on
the space ofoddsupertwistors.
An arbitrary supertwistor is a column vector

In the case of even supertwistors,is bosonic
andis fermionic.
In the case of odd supertwistors,is fermionic whileis bosonic.
The even and odd supertwistors are called pure.
It is useful to introduce the parity functiondefined as:ifis even, andifis odd.
It is also useful to define

Then the componentsof a pure supertwistor
have the following Grassmann parities

The space of even supertwistors is naturally identified with,
while the space of odd supertwistors may be identified with.

Let us introduce the following graded antisymmetricsupermatrix

wheredenotes the unitmatrix.
Making use ofallows us to define a graded symplectic inner product on the space of pure supertwistors by the rule: for arbitrary pure supertwistorsand,
the inner product is

where the row vectoris defined by

and is called the super-transpose of.
The above inner product is graded anti-symmetric:

The supergroupis defined to
consist of those evensupermatrices

which preserve the inner product (A.13) under the action

Such a transformation maps the space of even (odd) supertwistors onto itself.
The condition of invariance of the inner product (A.13)
under (A.17) is

It is useful to recast the definition ofin an equivalent form by writingas a block supermatrix:

A pure supertwistor is said to be real if its components obey the reality condition

The space of real even supertwistors is naturally identified with,
while the space of real odd supertwistors may be identified with.
Given two real supertwistorsand,
it holds that

The reality condition (A.24) is not preserved under the action (A.17) of.

By definition, the real subgroupconsists of those transformations which preserve the reality condition
(A.24),

In the case of complex supertwistors, the following involution can be defined

Its crucial property is thatis a supertwistor with respect to,

We also observe that

Given a real supertwistorsatisfying the reality condition (A.24), it holds that.

SECTION: Appendix BConformally flat atlas for AdSd

A-dimensional AdS space, AdSd,
can be identified with a hypersurface in pseudo-Euclidean spacedefined by

wheredenotes the Cartesian coordinates of,
withand.
One can cover AdSdby two charts:
(i) the north chart in which; and
(ii) the south chart in which.121212The north chart and the south chart are everywhere dense open subsets of AdSd. In particular, those points of AdSd, which do not belong to the north chart, are characterised by the conditionsand, and therefore they span a light cone in.Each chart may be parametrised using a natural generalisation of the stereographic projection for a-dimensional sphere.
Given a pointin the north chart, its local coordinateswill be chosen to correspond to the intersection of the hyperplanewith the straight lineconnectingand the “north pole”.
Similarly, given a pointin the south chart, its local coordinateswill be
chosen to correspond to the intersection of the hyperplanewith the straight lineconnectingand the “south pole”.

In the north chart, the straight linecan be parametrised
as

andcorresponds to some valueof the evolution parameter,. We then derive

The embedding coordinatescan be expressed in terms of the local ones,

For the induced metric we obtain

In the south chart, the straight linecan be parametrised
as

andcorresponds to some valueof the evolution parameter,. We obtain

The embedding coordinatesare expressed in terms of the local onesas follows:

The induced metric has the form

It remains to consider the intersection of the north and south charts, which is characterised by. A short calculation of the transition functions gives

It may also be seen thatin the intersection of the charts.

SECTION: Appendix CThe-extended superconformal algebra

In this appendix, we spell out our conventions for the-extended superconformal algebra of Minkowski superspace,. It was initially described in the literature by Park[66], see also[67]. We emphasise that the appropriate relations differ by an overall sign as compared with those of eq. (5.55). This distinction arises from our adoption of the convention where generators act on fields and operators in a consistent manner.

The conformal algebra,, consists of the translation, Lorentz, special conformaland dilatationgenerators. Amongst themselves, they obey the algebra

The-symmetry groupis generated by theandgenerators, which commute with all elements of the conformal algebra. Amongst themselves, they obey the commutation relations

The superconformal algebra is then obtained by extending the translation generator toand the special conformal generator to. The commutation relations involving the-supersymmetry generators with the bosonic ones are:

At the same time, the commutation relations involving the-supersymmetry generators
with the bosonic operators are:

Finally, the anti-commutation relations of the fermionic generators are:

We emphasise that all (anti-)commutators not listed above vanish identically.

SECTION: References