SECTION: A Variational Approach to the Yamabe Problem: Conformal Transformations and Scalar Curvature on Compact Riemannian Manifolds

SECTION: 1Introduction and preliminaries

The Yamabe problem asks if any Riemannian metricon a compact smooth manifoldof dimensionis conformal to a metric with constant scalar curvature.
This problem was born in 1960, from Hidehiko Yamabe’s attempt to solve the then not yet proved Poincaré conjecture in his paper[yamabe].

Every simply connected, closed 3-manifold is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere. Where closed means compact without boundary.

In 2003 John Milnor wrote a nice survey[milnor]right after Perelman proved the Poincaré conjecture. The Poincaré conjecture is a purely topological statement, but turned out that it was proved by using the Riemannian metric structure on smooth manifolds.

The classical result by Killing and Hopf shows how the metric structure can give topological information, and it provides a road to the Poincaré conjecture.

The universal cover of a manifold of constant sectional curvature is one of the model spaces:

sphere (positive sectional curvature)

plane (zero sectional curvature)

hyperbolic manifold (negative sectional curvature)

(SeeA.2for the definition of sectional curvature.)

From the above theorem we understand that it suffices to prove the Poincaré conjecture if, over on any simply connected closed 3-manifold, we can build a Riemannian metric with constant sectional curvature. It is a fundamental result that any smooth manifold has a Riemannian metric (see Definition 2.1 in the book[CarmoR]), but the question is whether such a Riemannian metric can have constant sectional curvature? Or, for an arbitrary Riemannian metric, are we able to deform this metric such that it has constant sectional curvature?

An approach to finding such a constant curvature metric is to identify the critical point of the Hilbert-Einstein action.

For a closed Riemannian manifold, the action is given as

whereandstand, respectively, for the scalar curvature (seeA.3for the definition of scalar curvature) ofand the volume form determined by the metric and orientation.

The survey[logunov2004were]provided a historical review on the finding of the Hilbert-Einstein equations. Following the idea of the least action principle (Hilbert’s Axiom I), Hilbert found the critical point of the action, which gives us the well-known gravitational field equation.

Ifis the manifold constrained to metrics of volume one, the critical points of Hilbert-Einstein action must satisfy:

whereis the metric tensor,is the Ricci curvature (seeA.3for the definition of the Ricci curvature) ofandis the constant of proportionality.

For any Riemannian manifold whose Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric, it is an Einstein manifold; the metrics that satisfy (1) are Einstein metrics.

In Chapter 1.1 of the book[besse2007einstein], Besse introduced an important topological property of the Einstein Manifold:

A closed 3-dimensional (pseudo) Riemannian manifold is Einstein iff it has constant sectional curvature.

From the above proposition and Killing-Hopf (see Theorem1.1), we find that a 3-dimensional closed manifold that has constant sectional curvature is equivalent to a sphereSo it suffices to prove the Poincaré conjecture if, for a 3-manifold, we can find critical points of the Hilbert-Einstein action that gives us constant sectional curvature.

This approach falls short because it is difficult to prove the existence of Einstein metrics that give us constant sectional curvature on any closed manifold. However, it is much easier to have a scalar curvature than having a constant sectional curvature. See the following example of a 3-manifold that does not have Einstein metric but has constant scalar curvature.

The topological property of Einstein metrics suggest that, if a 3-manifold has an Einstein metric, then it has constant scalar curvature, its universal cover is diffeomorphic toor(both Euclidean space and hyperbolic space are diffeomorphic to). Now considerwith the universal cover. Since it is not homeomorphic toor, hencedoes not have an Einstein metric.
However, the scalar curvature of the product manifold is the sum of the scalar curvature of these two manifolds (see PropositionA.0.1), sohas constant scalar curvature ifandare equipped with the standard unit sphere metric.

Therefore, it makes sense for Yamabe to consider another related problem in a more restricted area:

Given a compact Riemannian manifoldof
dimension, is there a metricconformal tothat has a constant scalar curvature?

This survey serves as the capstone paper of my senior year under the guidance of Professor Engelstein. It follows that given in the survey[Neumayer], and the survey[Lee]; for the Riemannian geometry part it mostly refers to the book[CarmoR]; for the analysis part it mostly refers to the book[evans], and for the part of concentration compactness we follow the approach of Lions[lions1984concentration1,lions1984concentration2].

We will start by taking the analytical approach to discuss how the minimizer of Yamabe functional provides constant scalar curvature, and its relationship with the Sobolev SpaceThen with stereographic projection and dilation, we will show the importance of the sphere, and the fact that the minimizer of Yamabe functional on standard sphere is the standard metric and its conformal diffeomorphisms. This will give us the constraintwhich leads us to the final theorem that the Yamabe problem is solvable whenFor the proof of this theorem we follow the approach of concentration compactness.

SECTION: 2The Analytical approach of the Yamabe Problem

Given two conformal metricsand(for choice of index, see AppendixB). Letanddenote the scalar curvatures ofand, respectively. These quantities are related by the identity

Recall the Hilbert-Einstein action (see Definition1.1), that is,. Here we consider a normalized version

in whichis chosen such thatfor any.

Notice thatis the exponent in the strict Sobolev embedding (see AppendixCfor the fundamental knowledge of the Sobolev space), which will play a decisive role in the latter part.Therefore, we define the Yamabe constant ofby

Now take the variation. For any variation, we have

Notice thatandare numbers, letand we have. If u is a minimizer, from (2) we see thatis constant.

To summarize thus far, to solve the Yamabe problem, it suffices to show the existence of a smooth positive minimizer of. However, we will see in the later part that establishing such a minimizer is difficult because the problem lacks compactness.

SECTION: 2.1Why do we consider Sobolev space

To find a minimizer of Yamabe functional, for a minimizing sequencethat satisfies, the goal is to show thatconverges to a smooth metric, which is the minimizer of the Yamabe functional.

Then naturally 2 questions arise:

1. How do we show the convergence?

2. What are the properties of the limit metric?Whenever considering convergence of functions, we first need to choose a topology of convergence. In this case, we choose a norm on the function space. As we solve differential equations, it is natural to consider the Sobolev space. (seeC.1about the definition of Sobolev space.) The question is why are we looking at space?

Basically, this is asking that, given the basic condition of the problem, what is the largest space thatcould live in andmust be square integrable for us to start talking about.

Consider the minimizer of the normalized Hilbert-Einstein action. Its numerator is, and its denominator is. It is natural to let the normalizing term, and sinceis compact, we havefor some constant. Therefore,is bounded. It follows thatis bounded. Also, sinceis bounded, we see thatis bounded.

In summary, we have,,all bounded. Sois bounded in bothand. The Sobolev inequality (seeC.2about the Sobolev inequality) tells us thatis a more restrictive condition, hence it is natural to consider.

SECTION: 2.2Lack of compactness of the embeddinginto

The Yamabe functional consists two parts: the numerator, which is close tonorm (seeC.2about Sobolev norm), and the denominator. So when the Yamabe functional is bounded and approaching a value, we can expect our function to weakly converge in thespace, and by the Sobolev embedding theorem (seeC.2.1), this also means that it will weakly converge in thespace.

Therefore we cannot just apply the direct method of the calculus of variations, since the embedding ofintois not compact (for compactness theorem seeC.4), and we could have lower semicontinuity of the energy only if there is strong convergence of the minimizing sequence in

The following example shows that the direct method can be used to establish the existence of minimizers in a particular case of.

Since, we have that, andiffis minimizer of the.Sinceis compact, we have the Sobolev embedding (seeC.2.1):

The first embedding is not compact. Hence ifis a sequence withconverge to, then by the Sobolev inequality, we see thatbounded impliesbounded (we can constrain on). So there is a subsequence such thatweakly converge inand, and converge strongly in. Since, we have that

Note that ifthen the above inequality may not hold, since the lower semicontinuity of thenorm goes in the wrong direction. Also, the smoothness should relies on the regularity property of Laplacian operator.

From the above example we see that the lower semicontinuity indoes not help since it is in the denominator. Another problem is that the weak limitmay be equal to zero. However, we could have lower semicontinuity of energyif the minimizing sequence converges strongly inFor example, if we consider the subcritical power:

By Rellich-Kondrachov theorem (seeC.4) the embeddingis compact, then with direct method there exist the minimizer

Historically, Trudinger gave this restrictive assumption in the paper[Trudinger], that the Yamabe problem could be solved wheneverIn fact, going one step further, he showed the existence of a positive constantsuch that the problem could be solved whenBased on Trudinger’s result, Aubin showed in the paper[aubin1976equations]thatfor everyThis established the following theorem:

Suppose. Then there exists a minimizer ofand hence a solution of the Yamabe problem on M.

This is one of the three main theorems of the Yamabe problem and serves as the main theorem of this survey. For the other two main theorems, see the survey[Lee]on the proofs ofin dimensionsand higher given, respectively, by Schoen[schoen1984conformal]and Aubin[aubin1976equations].

SECTION: 3The Yamabe Problem on the Sphere

From Theorem2.1we understand that the model case of the sphereplays an important role in the proofing of the Yamabe problem. We start this section by discussing a natural question, that is why do we consider the sphere?

SECTION: 3.1Stereographic projection

Letbe the north pole on. Stereographic projectionis defined byforwhere

We can verify thatis a conformal diffeomorphism. Ifis the standard metric on, andis the Euclidean metric on, then underthe round metric on spherecorresponds to

This can be written as

We denote this byin the latter part, where. By means of stereographic projection, it gives the conformal diffeomorphisms of the sphere induced by the standard conformal transformations on the plane, as shown in the diagram

The group of such diffeomorphisms is generated by the rotations, together with maps of the formwhereis the dilationforCombine with (3), we get the spherical metric ontransforms under dilations to

For standard metric onwe have

whereConsider the dilation. Since it’s conformal transformation we get that

whereis given by (4).
Notice, then we rewrite as

Considering the two cases of whetheris at the south pole, letwe get that,

We see that forconverges weakly to 0, so allconcentrate near the South pole. Now consider this metric on the neighbourhood of any manifold, we have

Hence we obtain the restriction in Theorem2.1.

SECTION: 3.2Two important results on the sphere

After understanding the importance of the sphere, we now show that the infimum of the Yamabe functional is attained by the standard metricon the sphere

This was originally independently proved by Aubin[aubin1976problemes]and G.Talenti[talenti1976best]. Here, we will follow the approach by Morio Obata ([obata1971conjectures]) and Karen Uhlenbeck ([Sacks1981TheEO]). It consists of two parts:

The metricis the standard metric, and it’s conformal diffeomorphism. (Proposition3.0.1.)

The infimumis attained by a smooth
metricin the conformal class of the standard metric(Proposition3.0.2)

The first part is given by Obata in the survey[obata1971conjectures]about the conformal diffeomorphism on the sphere.

Ifis a metric onthat is conformal to the standard round metricand has a constant scalar curvature, then up to a constant scale factor,is obtained fromby conformal diffeomorphism of the sphere.

We start by showing thatis the Einstein metric (see (1) for the definition of the Einstein metric). By the fact that the standard metrichas a constant sectional curvature and it is an Einstein metric, we get the following.

Sinceis traceless,. Then we can directly compute the norm ofby

Notice, thenand. On the other hand,andare both conformal to a flat metric on, and we have. As bothand, the curvature tensor is

This is the same as the standard metric on, hence by by Killing-Hopf (see Theorem1.1)has constant sectional curvature (not just constant scalar curvature). Therefore,is isometric to the standardby, hence, and this isometry is the desired conformal diffeomorphism.
∎

Now we have shown that the group of metricsis a conformal diffeomorphism. However, they are not compact, that is, the family of metricson the sphere are not uniformly bounded. Therefore, it is crucial to prove the existence of extremals on the sphere. This leads to the other proposition given by Uhlenbeck[Sacks1981TheEO].

There exists a positivefunctioninthat satisfies.

Without loss of generality, assume.
For(recall), letbe the minimizer of, with(for this part, seeD.1.1). Ifis uniformly bounded for all, then Ascoli-Arzela (see C.7 in the book[evans]) implies that up to the subsequenceconverges to. Therefore, we really care about the case whenis not uniformly bounded. Composing with a rotation, we may assume that eachachieves its supremum at the south pole (Q), and.
Now letwe define

for eachFor each, choose the value ofso thatat the south pole. Notice that

whereis the conformal factor, and at the south pole, so that for each, we get

and

For simplicity of computation, let us denote

Noticeis part of the conformal translation, this definition will make sure that, if the pull back operator, then

which implies

Now we also assume, then

So there is constant, such that

On the other hand it is easy to show that, there exist, with

Then we get that

Also direct computation as below shows that

A brief summarize, so far we get

is bounded in

goes toas

Since all the functionsare smooth on, we know that eachis also smooth. Also, for anywe have

So asand,is bounded by, which does not depend on. Therefore, for each,is theneighborhood of the north pole, thenis uniformly bounded on. This implies that up to the subsequence,converges on.

On the other hand, andfor, so we conclude that at each point of,, for. Also,, so that. By the weak removable singularities theorem (seeD.1), the singularity at pointis weakly removable; hence there is, weakly satisfies the equation. Together with

We get that

Taking limit, we get

By definition of, we have that

Thisis what we are looking for.
∎

A notable conclusion is thatis the optimal constant for Sobolev embedding inby the above argument. This is helpful in the later part of the concentration compactness lemma (see Lemma4.1).

SECTION: 4Proof of Theorem2.1

Now we proof the main Theorem2.1of this note, that is, when, we can find a minimizer of the Yamabe functional (‣2) and therefore a solution to the Yamabe problem. We follow the approach of concentration compactness by Lion[lions1984concentration1,lions1984concentration2]in the survey[Neumayer], which plays an important role in the proof.

Supposeis uniformly bounded in, so. Up to subsequences, we can assume

Then

whereis an at most countable set of points in.

Let

The existence of the above weak limits are given by Banach-Alaoglu theorem (see Theorem 23.5 in the book[meise1997introduction]). Forwe have, thengiven by the lower semicontinuity. To show

one must showa.e. It is not difficult since we havebounded in, that is, forwe havein, which impliesa.e. Therefore, we have. Now, take any. Applying the Sobolev inequality, we have

Ifweakly converge toin, then for anywe have

And given by the strong convergence ofin, we get

Also given by the strong convergence ofin, and the fact thatis bounded for all, we have

So we have that

Following from (7) we get that,

Rearranging the powers, we have

This very unnatural thing looks like a reverse Hölder’s inequality. Applied toapproximating the characteristic function of any open set, (8) shows thatcontrolsnonlinearly:

This scaling will forceto be supported on a countable set of atoms. Indeed, sinceis a finite measure, it contains at most countably many atoms, say at. For any point, we can take any open setcontainingwith, so that (9) gives us

In other words,is absolutely continuous with respect toon.
Recallby the Radon-Nikodym theorem (seeD.2), for-a.e., we have

Hence, the support ofis contained onand so

Now take anyand by the reverse Hölder’s inequality (8), we haveit follows that

Now apply to awith, andon, we find

This gives us (6) hence concludes the proof.
∎

Now we can start proofing Theorem2.1.

SECTION: 4.1Proof of Theorem2.1

Letbe a minimizing sequence for. Without loss of generality, we may assume that. Up to a subsequence,inandinandwith. Note that if, thenstrongly in. This gives us the lower semicontinuity of the energy. Sinceconverges weakly toin, thenand also

Therefore we get

where, and. The concentration compactness lemma4.1implies that

Now together with the assumption that, we have

For such relation betweenand, we get

Then we getand, which is desired. This shows the spirit of the proof, that is, to find the proper relation between A and B such that the equality holds. This exact relation is given by the concentration compactness lemma (4.1), that is,

and

Therefore, by concentration compactness lemma (4.1), we have

Note that. Recall, we have

The final equality holds because. Now, sinceand again applying Jensen’s inequality, we have

Equality in (14) implies thator. If, then we have a strict inequality in (13). Therefore. This establishes the existence of a minimizer. Sincefor a.e., we may assume without loss of generality that. The results in the elliptic regularity theory (see[Trudinger]) show thatis smooth, and then the maximum principle ensures thatis positive. Thus, our minimizer is indeed a conformal factor.
∎

SECTION: Appendix ABasics of Riemannian Geometry

Most of this comes from the book[Yau]and the book[CarmoR]. For a more fundamental knowledge of Riemannian geometry, see the book[CarmoR].

SECTION: A.1Curvatures

The curvatureof a Riemannian manifoldis a correspondence that associates to every pair, a mappinggiven by:

whereis the Riemannian connection of.

The curvature measures the non-commutativity of the covariant derivative.

Letbe a 2-dim subspace of the tangent space. Then the sectional curvature is:

whereis the Riemann curvature tensor defined above. The sectional curvature is an analog of Gauss curvature on 2-dimensional surface; it is important because the Riemannian curvature tensor is uniquely determined by the sectional curvature.

Ricci curvature is the contraction of second and last index in curvature tensor:

Scalar curvature is the contraction of Ricci curvature with the inverse of metric

The geometric meaning of takingis to get the average of sectional curvatures of all the 2-d planes passing through

Over normal coordinate, the metriccan be expressed as

And the volume form is:

Letbe the product of two Riemannian manifolds, andbe its curvature tensor,,be curvature tensor forandrespectively, then one can relate,andby

where.

To show this, we need the following:

Here part 1 is simply by definition of product Riemannian manifold, part 2 can be shown in local coordinates, and part 3 can be shown by part 1 and part 2 and along with Koszul formula. For more details, see Exercise 1(a) of Chapter 6 in the book[CarmoR].

SECTION: Appendix BThe Conformal Map

First, to prove the above definition, we have. Assume, whereis a constant. The standard scalar curvature transformation formula foris

Sinceis a constant, we have that, andTherefore,, on the other hand

So we get the conformal transformation for Hilbert action

And the transformation of volume is

Therefore, for, we have

Since we need, we have, it follows that

Now for more general cases let, in whichis a smooth function, then we have

So

Denote, then the denominator becomes. Then by formula (15), we also get

And that

At last we conclude this note by

SECTION: Appendix CSobolev Space

Most of the materials refer to Chapter 5 of the book[evans].

Let, and letbe a natural number. A functionis said to lie inif its weak derivativesexist and lie infor all. Iflies in, we define thenorm ofby the formula

.

If, we define its norm to be

If, the Sobolev conjugate of p is

AssumeThere exists a constantdepending only onand, such that

for all

Assume.Since u has compact support, for eachandwe have

then

it follows that

Integrate (19) with respect toand using the generalized Hölder inequality, we have

From NoteC.1we knowis the Sobolev conjugatewhen p = 1, it follows that

Now consider the case of. Choose, we have

By the definition of derivative we have

Apply Hölder’s inequality, it follows that

Recall, then

It follows that

and so

Notice, therefore we have

∎

Let M be a bounded open subset of, supposeis. Assumeand. Then, with the estimate

The constantdepending only onand,and.

Letbe such that. Thenembeds continuously into.

Assumeis a bounded open subset ofandis. Letbe such that. Then

SECTION: Appendix DAnalytic preliminaries

Letbe an open set inand. Supposeis a weak solution ofin, withandfor some.Thensatisfiesweakly on all of.

For the proof of this theorem, check Proposition 2.7 in the survey[Lee].

Forthere exists a smooth, positive solutionto the subcritical equation, for whichand

For the proof of this proposition see the paper[yamabe]and the survey[Lee].

On the measurable space, define twofinite measures,and. It states that if(that is, ifis absolutely continuous with respect to, then there exists ameasurable functionsuch that for any measurable set