SECTION: Matrix manipulations via unitary transformations and ancilla-state measurements

We propose protocols for calculating inner product, matrix addition and matrix multiplication based on multiqubit Toffoli-type and the simplest one-qubit operations and employ
ancilla-measurements to remove all garbage of calculations.

The depth (runtime) of addition protocol isand that of
other protocols logarithmically increases with the dimensionality of the considered matrices.

Introduction.–Quantum computers can outperform classical computers by exploiting quantum features to solve problems efficiently. Those quantum features are exploited by devising efficient quantum algorithms that take less running time (number of steps) to solve computational tasks. Quantum algorithms such as Deutsch-Jozsa, Grover’s Search, and Shor’s quantum factoring provide substantial speedup to classical algorithms.
Quantum algorithms represent a widely acknowledged area of quantum information whose intensive development is stimulated by the fast progress in constructing quantum processors based on superconducting qubits (IBM, Google), trapped-ion technology (ionQ), topological qubits (Microsoft).

Finding solutions to systems of linear equations is a ubiquitous problem in science and engineering.
The Harrow-Hassidim-Loyd (HHL) algorithmHHLis a quantum algorithm that approximates a solution to a system of linear equations with an exponential speedup over the fastest classical algorithm. Afterwards, other quantum algorithms to solve systems of linear equations were proposedCJS;BWPRWL;WZPand some simple meaningful instances of the HHL algorithm were experimentally realisedHHL4;HHL5;HHL6;HHL7.
There is, however, a significant obstacle in realizing the control rotation of ancilla via quantum-mechanical tool in the HHL algorithm. An alternative protocol for solving systems of linear algebraic equations with a particular realization on superconducting quantum processor of IBM Quantum Experience was proposed inSID, which also has certain disadvantage requiring inversion of the matrix via classical algorithm.
There are many applications of the HHL-algorithm in various protocols based on matrix operationsWang;ZhaoZ;Tak, including solving differential equationsBerry. The protocols of matrix algebra proposed inZZRFare based on Trotterization method and Baker-Champbell-Housdorff formula for exponentiating matrices. We underline the relevance of quantum Fourier transformQFT1;QFT2;QFT3and phase estimationCEMM;LPin most of the above protocols.
The inner product of arbitrary vectors as a matrix operation is calculated inZhaoZusing an ancilla and Hadamard operator. The result is obtained via probabilistic method by performing measurements on ancilla.
There is an alternative “Sender-Receiver” scheme for the inner product via a two-terminal quantum transmission lineSZ_2019.
The given vectors are encoded as the pure states of two separated senders and the result appears
in a certain element of the two-qubit receiver’s density matrix after evolution and applying the proper unitary transformation.
This model can be modified where time-evolution is not required and matrix operations are realized using the special unitary transformations onlyQZKW_arxiv.

In this paper we develop further the idea of using the unitary transformations of special type for realization of protocols of linear algebra.
We concentrate on another aspect of a matrix and consider that its elements are encoded into the pure state of a quantum system.
Matrix operations (scalar product, sum and product of two matrices) are realized via unitary operations over states of the composite quantum system supplemented with multiqubit ancilla.
Then we operate a number of different quantum operationson the resulting states of the whole system,
and discard the garbage to obtain the required result.
First, resultappears in a superposition state,,. Stored in this way,can be used as an input for another protocol after discarding garbage. Garbage can be removed by involving a one-qubit ancillasupplemented with the proper controlled projection and successive measurement onto obtain the outputwith the probability, thus mappingto.
Throughout the paper we assume that the initial state of a quantum system is prepared in advance, although this is a problem of its ownHK.

Inner Product.–We consider two-qubit subsystemsand(we set). The pure states

encode the elements of two vectors (complex in general)whereis the binary representation of.
Thus, each subsystemis encoded intoqubits and its dimensionality logarithmically increases with vector dimensionality.  The initial state of the whole system is.
We also consider an-qubit ancillain the state.
Now we introduce the control operators

whereis the projector acting on the pair ofth qubits of the subsystemsand,is the Pauli matrix,is the identity operator applied to theth qubit of the ancilla,is the 2-qubit identity operator acting on theth spins of the subsystemsand.  Hereafter, in general,is the identity operator acting
on the system. Note that all,,, commute by construction. We apply the operatoron, and obtain

Notice that all information needed to perform the inner product is collected in the first term of the state(3).
The second termis the garbage which is to be eventually removed. Since allwith differentare applied to different triples of qubits, they can be applied simultaneously.
Now we label the result and garbage in the stateto prevent them from mixing in the following calculations. For this goal we introduce the
projector1-qubit ancillain the initial stateand apply the control operatorto the ancillaeand, respectively.
Thus we obtain

The control operatorwith the-qubit control register can be
represented in terms ofToffoli operatorsKShV. Therefore the depth of the circuit calculatingis.

Now we apply the Hadamard transformationsto all the qubits ofsimultaneously except the ancilla,

To label the new garbage, we
introduce the projectorprepare another ancillain the ground stateand apply the control operatorto:

The control operatorwithcontrol qubits can be represented in terms ofToffoli gatesKShV.

The inner product of two vectors is stored in a probability amplitude. Measuring the ancillawith the outputwe remove the garbage and stay with the single term in the quantum state

which stores the phase of the inner product. The absolute value of the inner product is known from the probability of the above measurement which is.

The whole depth of the protocol is defined by the operatorsand, in both cases it is.
The circuit is given in Fig. 1(d).

Matrix Addition.–For adding twomatrices,, with the elements(,), we first introduce two registersandofqubits and two registersandofqubits which enumerate rows and columns of both matrices, and two additional qubitsandassociated with the matricesandrespectively.
The pure states encoding the elements of matrices are

whereis a parameter.
The initial state of the whole system reads

Our aim is to organize the sumand label the garbage.
To this end we introduce the 1-qubit ancillain the ground states, and define the operator

whereis the Pauli matrix, andare the projectors

Obviously,.
Applying the operatortowe obtain:

Now we construct the control operator

that acts onand swaps the states ofwithand states ofwithto yield

We notice that the SWAPs in the control operatorhave common single control and are related to different pairs of qubits; therefore they can be applied simultaneously. Consequently, the depth of this operator is.
Next, we apply the Hadamard operatorstoand:

Thus, the sum of two matrices is stored in the first term of.
To label the garbage, we prepare the 1-qubit ancillain the state,
introduce the projectorand apply the control operatorto:

Finally, on measuring the ancillawith the outputwe remove the garbage and obtain

where the normalizationis known from the probability of the above measurement
which is.  It follows from the above consideration that the depth of this protocol is.
The circuit is given in Fig. 1(e).

Matrix Multiplication.–We present a protocol for multiplyingmatrixbymatrix, with the elements,,
 assuming,,with positive
integers,,.

We first introduce one register ofqubits, two registers ofqubits and one register ofqubits which enumerate rows and columns of both matrices.
The pure states encoding the elements of matrices are

The initial state of the whole system reads

We also consider the-qubit ancillain the ground state.
Now we define the operators

whereis the identity operators acting on theth qubit of the ancilla,is the identity operator acting on the 2-qubit subsystem including theth qubits ofand, andare the projectors acting on theth cubits ofand.
All operators,,commute with each other.
Applying the operatortowe obtain: