SECTION: The Alchemical Integral Transform revisited
SECTION: Introduction
Schrödinger’s equation yields the absolute energy spectrum and corresponding eigen states. However, most, if not all, processes of interest in chemistry and materials science deal only with relative changes between systemsand. Early relative computations, e.g. treating nuclear charges or entire functional groups as (non-discrete) parameters, trace back to Hückel, Hylleraas & Midtal, Wilson, Politzer & Parrand Levy.
In this sense, nuclear transmutations aka computational alchemy, simply correspond to yet another fundamental method of inferring information from one quantum system to another.
The extensive work done on 1D systems and their application to higher dimensions is dedicated to such fundamental questions. Another example comes from conceptual DFT.

Alchemical approaches may realize such inference with rigor in that only parameters are changed, instead of adding electrons or entire dimensions.
Some of the more recent applications of alchemy to quantum mechanical problems include the exploration of chemical compound space, design of large band-gap (III)-(IV) semi-conductors,
treatment of alchemically symmetric molecules, reactions like deprotonations, bonds, or excitations.

In a previous paper, we studied relative energies using an Alchemical Integral Transform (AIT), allowing its user to fully recover the energy of a final systemfrom an iso-electronic initial system’s electron densityand energy.
AIT’s utility hinges on finding a suitable parametrization, withbeing the parameter of alchemical change.
The need for the parametrization emerged from rewriting a general electron densitysuch that any-dependency rested with a parametrizationof the coordinates (cf. Eqs.and), andwas found by trial and error.

Here, we present a rigorous and compact derivation of AIT’s kernel, and discuss conditions, constraints and mathematical freedoms of findingindimensions. First, we consider the constraint of probability conservation: then,can be found as long as the coordinates of systemscan be expressed as one another by an affine transformation, i.e.whereis an invertible matrix and.
Furthermore, we look at the constraint of a known electric dipole moment.

By extension, we obtain analytical expressions of relative electron densities, the functional behavior of energies with respect to the system’s parameters, and conservation laws for the electron densities.
Examples include homogeneous potentials (iso-tropic quantum harmonic oscillator, hydrogen-like atom, Dirac well) in one- and multiparticle cases and a fictitious harmonic multiparticle system.

SECTION: A new derivation
Consider any two iso-electronic systems with electronic Hamiltoniansandand their external potentialsand. Connect them via a linear transformationsuch that we obtain a general electron densityat every pointwith,.
The first-order derivative of the general energy according to the Hellmann-Feynman theorem corresponds to:

with potential differenceand general electron densityalong.

The original derivation in Ref.continued with a perturbative expansion of the energy in; here, we employ the converse approach with thermodynamic integration:

Now, we rewrite the general electron densityin terms of the initial electron densityand the parametrization(which implicitly depends on):

This differs from the original definitionin that we introduced a normalization. In doing so,now only needs to transform the coordinates of systemsuch that theof the intermediate system is ensured.

Inserting Eq.into Eq.and reordering, we find a general kernel of AIT, dubbed:

Thus, we rephrased the problem’s original question from "What are the eigen values and eigen functions of the Hamiltonian?" to "What is the mathematical structure of the coordinates of the underlying Hamiltonian?". Both questions are equivalent but the latter is more accessible as we will show below.

SECTION: The parametrization
To progress, we want to find a solution to Eq.without solving for the density directly.
Using constraints like the probability conservation of the density restricts AIT to problems where(with some invertible matixand a vector offset), i.e. systems whose coordinates can be expressed as one another by an affine transformation. With affine transformations, we can easily solve:

The left-hand side is just the total number of particles along the alchemical path, which remains a constant. The integral on the right-hand side can be solved by substitutingwith a Jacobian of.

Inserting this intoas defined in Eq.:

However, the parametrizationis not limited to affine transformations of the coordinates. Eq.allows to include multiple constraints beyond probability conservation. In fact, this is one advantage of AIT since materials design is generally not interested in arbitrary iso-electronic energy differences, but rather those which are subject to constraints.

For example, consider two systems whose first component of the electric dipole moment is known at coordinate componentalong:

This constraint allows for a different parametrization:

with primed quantities excluding the first component, i.e. invertible-matrix, coordinate vectorand vector offset.
Inserting Eq.into Eq., we find:

With knowledge of, we can calculateas defined in Eq.:

However, even without any additional constraints the parametrizationof the coordinates can be extended by a functionin dimensionsdue to the behavior of the determinant:

is the outer product ofandand thus, has rank 1. But the determinant of any matrix with no full rank is always zero by the invertible matrix theorem such that

for any dimension greater 1. Consequently, all parametrizations which depend only onmay be included.

Further constraints of the problem allow to extend the possible parametrizations. This method of constraints implicates thatcan be found just from the problem’s statement in the Hamiltonian.

Note how Eq.made no assumption about excited states whatsoever; in fact, it conserves the excitation between initial and final system.

SECTION: The final density
A corollary from the derivation of transformations is a direct statement about the density of the final system. For example, since we assumed an affine transformation in Eq.and then proceeded to computein Eq., we immediately find:

whereandare a constant matrix and vector, respectively. This means, if two Hamiltonians are related via an affine transformation of their coordinates (disregarding any normalization) then their electron densities are related by Eq.and only the final configurationis necessary to connect them.

A similar statement can be made for systems with known electric dipole moment:

SECTION: Homogeneous potentials
Let us consider a class of examples: consider this-dimensional Schrödinger equation:

whereis any (positive) homogeneous function of degree, i.e., andis a real, positive constant describing system.
Transforming this Hamiltonian at parameterinto one at parameternecessiates a scaling transformation of the coordinates,:

The prefactor ofis accounted for by.

Clearly, this is a restriction of affine transformations to(representing identity indimensions) and. Because of this, degreemust be excluded as it would constitute the case where Schrödinger’s equation includes no parameter to be changed and AIT does not apply.

To calculate the kernelfor energy differences between systemand, we also need the potential differenceand:

The corresponding relative density (cf. Eq.) is found to be:

Special cases are

the quantum harmonic oscillator with,,:

A visualization can be found in Fig..
The-dimensional isotropic quantum harmonic oscillator (QHO) works analogously.

the Hydrogen-like atom with,,:

the Dirac well of depthwith,,:

The explicit evaluation of the integrals in Eqs.andand the explicit electron densities can be found in the SI. AIT correctly reproduces the well-known results in all three cases above. A generalization to quasi-homogeneous functions is straightforward.

SECTION: Multi-particle systems
In multielectron systems, it is no longer obvious how the parametrization, a transform of, can be found, due to multiple coordinatesfor each electron.
This is quickly resolved via the definition of. Consider an-electron problem:

The second line applies to indistinguishable, and thus interchangeable, electrons and hence, all coordinatesmust transform identically. For an application to real multielectron systems, we refer to Ref.(and specifically the Hamiltonian). Due to the nature of such systems, Ref.must resort to comparisons with numerical and experimental results, while in this work we will present only a theoretical basis and two examples.
As we might consider interacting particles which behave not necessarily like electrons, we will instead referring toas a (particle) density from here on.

Consider the homogeneous system presented in Eq.but now withparticles and interparticle repulsion proportional to distance:

It is easy to check how this additional level of complexity leaves the derivation of Eqs.anduntouched. Consequently, Eq.results in the same kerneland density relationship as before.

In contrast to the single particle systems, the density of multiparticle systems is usually not known and the integral

cannot be evaluated explicitly. But even for systems with cumbersome or unknown solutions, knowledge aboutis not necessary to extract statements using AIT. The exact (and possibly excited!) energy difference derived from the kernel in Eq.can be used twice, once for the energy difference between systems, then between, to give:

Asis independent of, so must be the right-hand side. Consequently

withbeing constant with respect to, i.e.

Although these examples of homogeneous potentials above corroborate the validity of AIT, results for densities (and, by extension, energy differences) could have also been obtained via coordinate scaling as employed in DFT. Especially Eq.has been previously derived.
However, AIT allows for more complicated transformations and goes beyond (scalar) coordinate scaling which we will show now.

Consider the following multi-particle system inside a harmonic potential with a variation of the interparticle repulsion:

The potential strength is encoded in the diagonal matrix, the interparticle strength is. This interparticle repulsion is not proportional to distancebut the component-wise coordinate difference. This multiparticle system allows a separate treatment for each dimension and is clearly not separable intoone-particle systems (if).being an arbitrary diagonal matrix (except for scalar multiples of, i.e.) suffices to move beyond coordinate scaling. Eq.is, however, separable into itsdimensions which we exploit in the parametrization

similar to an isotropic QHO.
Note that this parametrization still allows for the cancellation of kinetic and repulsive terms, so Eq.applies.
Again, we need not worry about the normalization although in this case, it is harder to see why: the definition ofin Eq.allows for a factorization intonormalization constants. Consequently, we could have writtenas a sum overdimensions and treated every dimension in Eq.separately.

Equipped with a parametrization, we find the kernel:

Write the energy difference and relative densities using AIT:

where the matrix power applies to the main diagonal element-wise.
Still,is unknown. To extract analytical statements, we again apply the trick introduced above in Eq.:

withbeing constant with respect to.

SECTION: Discussion
The transformations presented here, be they affine, of square-root type or with functions including, connect a number of systems indimensions and for multiparticle systems as well. Thus, if the solution to a Hamiltonian proves unfeasible,may provide systematic access to its energy and particle density behavior and aid with relative tools in finding eigen valueseigen states. This point is worth repeating: finding a suitable parametrizationof the coordinates of two Schrödinger equations awards immediate relative information about the energy spectra and the (excited) densities! Thus, it provides the study of chemical compound space with an analytical tool of navigation.

However, the constraints employed to find such a parametrization also restrict the set of compoundsconnected by this very parametrization. On one hand, this is a limitation of AIT and the corresponding chemical compound space. On the other hand, such restrictions on possible compounds equip materials design with a tool for localization. As the number of possible materials is colossal, pinpointing small subsets of compounds can be considered desirable.

Furthermore, the new formula ofin Eq.evades any problems of convergence inherent in its original derivation. Although tested numerically for transmutations in atoms and molecules in Ref., here we need not worry about divergences in absence of an infinite series. However, AIT is a relative method; when calculating explicit values with Eq., its accuracy depends on the quality of the initial electron density(and by extension, the integration algorithm).

It has not escaped our attention that homogeneous functions as potentials provide elegant connections between kinetic and potential energy in the virial theorem. However, this relation is due to Euler’s homogeneous function theorem (i.e. a consequence of the derivative behavior of homogeneous functions), while AIT obtains its parameterby taking the-th root. Nonetheless, this is not the first time in which the mathematical properties of a homogeneous potential act in favor of a theorem.

Constraining AIT to homogeneous functions and scaling transformations () allowed a generalization of the three homogeneous examples (QHO, Hydrogen-like atom, Dirac well).
Whichever potential is used, Eqs.andallow statements about the solutions of Schrödinger’s equations without the necessity to ever explicitly solve them.
In this regard, it becomes equivalent to coordinate scaling in DFT as described in Refs..
Note that the fraction of two homogeneous functions is again a homogeneous function. Consequently, one might refrain from Taylor-expanding a physical potential to model materials in arbitrary dimensions, and instead employ a Padé approximant which, in addition, exhibits better convergence properties and truncation error.

However, coordinate scaling in homogeneous potentials alone does not allow for additional constraints of the problem. Here, AIT stands out by including external constraints via Eq.like the known electric dipole moment in Eq.. In addition, we were able to treat the multiparticle system in Eq.where general solutions are difficult (or analytically impossible) to obtain, yet Eqs.anddisclose information about the (excited) energies and conservation laws of the density.
We are aware that many systems can be solved numerically to desired accuracy; however, we deem such analytical statements about the relationship between systems always preferable to numerical ones and thus, consider AIT to be an effective tool in navigating between systems.

SECTION: Conclusion
We have presented a simpler and more general kernelof AIT indimensions, with a method to obtain parametrizations, an application to homogeneous potentials of degree, and two instances of a multiparticle system (Eqs.and). AIT did not just predict the relative behavior of energy spectra, but relative densities as well. In doing so, we remedied issues discussed in a previous paperlike the convergence problems of the kernelas a series, the unknown parametrization or any rigorous method of obtaining it, and an extension of AIT to analytical statements between systems with analytically unknown energies or densities.

Future work will deal with general parametrizationsin-dimensional systems. To solve Eq., one might employ additional information about the initial electron density, similar to the presented known electric dipole moment in Eq.. Building on such additional constraints might provide an elegant path to connect not just the ground-state energies and densities of compoundsand, but all available excited states as well.

SECTION: Supplementary Material
The solution to the integrals in Eqs.andand the explicit electron densities can be found in the Supplemental Material.

SECTION: Acknowledgements
We acknowledge discussions with Dirk Andrae, Kieron Burke, Florian Bley and Danish Khan.
O.A.v.L. has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 772834).
This research was undertaken thanks in part to funding provided to the University of Toronto’s Acceleration Consortium from the Canada First Research Excellence Fund, grant number: CFREF-2022-00042. O.A.v.L. has received support as the Ed Clark Chair of Advanced Materials and as a Canada CIFAR AI Chair.

SECTION: Author contributions
conceptualization (lead), formal analysis (lead), investigation (lead), methodology (lead), writing - original draft (lead), writing - review & editing (equal).conceptualization (supporting), formal analysis (supporting), investigation (supporting), methodology (supporting), funding acquisition, project administration, resources, supervision (lead), writing - review & editing (equal)

SECTION: Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

SECTION: References
Simon León Krug,and O. Anatole von Lilienfeld

SECTION: Integrals of the electron density
SECTION: The quantum harmonic oscillator
where the electron density of the quantum harmonic oscillator is given as:

PROOF:

Now use the recurrence relation

and the orthogonality relation

such that:

SECTION: The Hydrogen-like atom
where the electron density of the Hydrogen-like atom is given as:

with generalized Laguerre polynomialsand spherical harmonics.PROOF:Note the orthogonality relation of the generalized Laguerre polynomials:

and the orthogonality relation of the spherical harmonics:

First, execute the angular integration, then substitute: