SECTION: Bayes-Optimal Unsupervised Learning for Channel Estimation in Near-Field
Holographic MIMO

Holographic MIMO (HMIMO) is being increasingly recognized as a key
enabling technology for 6G wireless systems through the deployment
of an extremely large number of antennas within a compact space to
fully exploit the potentials of the electromagnetic (EM) channel.
Nevertheless, the benefits of HMIMO systems cannot be fully unleashed
without an efficient means to estimate the high-dimensional channel,
whose distribution becomes increasingly complicated due to the accessibility
of the near-field region. In this paper, we address the fundamental
challenge of designing alow-complexity Bayes-optimalchannel
estimator in near-field HMIMO systems operating inunknownEM environments. The core idea is to estimate the HMIMO channels solely
based on the Stein’s score function of the received
pilot signals and an estimated noise level,withoutrelying
on priors or supervision that is not feasible in practical deployment.
A neural network is trained with the unsupervised denoising score
matching objective to learn the parameterized score function. Meanwhile,
a principal component analysis (PCA)-based algorithm is proposed to
estimate the noise level leveraging the low-rank near-field spatial
correlation. Building upon these techniques, we develop a Bayes-optimal
score-based channel estimator for fully-digital HMIMO transceivers
in a closed form. The optimal score-based estimator is also extended
to hybrid analog-digital HMIMO systems by incorporating it into a
low-complexity message passing algorithm. The (quasi-) Bayes-optimality
of the proposed estimators is validated both in theory and by extensive
simulation results. In addition to optimality, it is shown that our
proposal is robust to various mismatches and can quickly adapt to
dynamic EM environments in an online manner thanks to its unsupervised
nature, demonstrating its potential in real-world deployment.

SECTION: IIntroduction

With an ultra-massive number of antennas closely packed in a compact
space, holographic MIMO (HMIMO) is envisioned as a promising next-generation
multi-antenna technology to enable an unprecedentedly high degree
of spectral and energy efficiency[2]. Extensive research
efforts have been dedicated to many different aspects of HMIMO systems,
suchas fundamental performance limits[3],
channel measurement and modeling[2,4,5,6,7],
beamforming and focusing methods[8,9,10,11],
positioning and sensing[12,13], and integrated
sensing and communications[14], etc. Nevertheless, one
fundamental problem is that, the promised gains of HMIMO can hardly
be realized without an efficient means to estimate the extremely high-dimensional
channel.

The challenges to estimate the HMIMO channel are mainly three-fold[15]. The first challenge arises from the complicated
and dynamic channel distributions. The extremely large-scale array
significantly expands the near-field region with spherical wavefront,
which greatly complicates the channel distributions and enlarges the
codebook size to sparsify the channel[16]. Also, since
HMIMO systems often operate at higher frequency bands, they are vulnerable
to various types of blockage and movement, which can easily shift
the channel distributions in a dynamic manner. Second, priors or a
supervised dataset are difficult to obtain. Existing estimators either
utilized the prior knowledge, e.g., sparsity in some transform domain,
or a large supervised channel dataset, to enhance the estimation accuracy.
Nevertheless, both of them require tedious, if not prohibitive, efforts
to realize in practice, considering the enormous system scale and
the complicated channel distributions in the near-field HMIMO systems.
The computational complexity poses the third challenge. The scale
of near-field HMIMO systems prohibits the use of classical Bayes-optimal
channel estimators which include complicated matrix inversion, and
calls for low-complexity alternatives.

SECTION: I-ARelated Works

The simplest approach to estimating the channel is the least squares
(LS) method[17], which offers reasonable performance in
fully-digital systems but suffers from a high pilot overhead in hybrid
analog-digital systems. To enhance the performance, the regularized
LS estimators prevail, which, in addition to the LS objective, minimize
an extra regularization term to enforce the channel to follow the
prior knowledge of its characteristics, e.g., sparsity[18,19,20]or low-rankness[21]. By contrast, the Bayesian point of
view instead believes that the channels should follow a prior distribution,
and focuses on optimizing the maximum a posteriori (MAP) or the minimum
mean-square-error (MMSE) objectives[22]. Both the regularization-based
and Bayesian perspectives stress the availability of a proper prior.
Nevertheless, finding such a prior may be difficult in practice as
the HMIMO channels have become increasingly complicated, e.g., with
the near-field[16]and hybrid-field effects[23].
Simply resorting to the classical angular domain sparsity or the priors
based on some simple mixture distributions can no longer offer competitive
accuracy.

Deep learning (DL)-based approaches then emerge as a potential paradigm
that attempts to learn the priors from a large volume of data instead
of relying on hand-crafted designs[24,25].
As a result, data is fundamental to DL-based methods. Depending on
how the data are leveraged, DL methods can be categorized as supervised,
unsupervised, and generative approaches. As for the channel estimation
problem, supervised learning refers to those that require a paired
dataset of the received pilot signalsand the channel, i.e.,, in order to implicitly
exploit the prior, while the generative learning requires a dataset
ofto explicitly model the prior distribution[26].
However, both supervised and generative learning requires a dataset
involving the ground-truth channel, which, in practice,
cannot be easily acquired without a competitive channel estimator.
This brings about a chicken-and-egg dilemma: To train competitive
models we need to prepare a dataset of ground-truth channels, but
such a channel dataset comes from nowhere. To tackle the dilemma,
unsupervised learning is an ideal candidate as it only requires a
dataset of the received pilots, which can be readily
obtained in abundant volume. Existing unsupervised channel estimators
generally suffer from sub-optimal accuracy. In[27],
the authors proposed to train a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)-based
neural network to minimize online loss functions based on the LS and
the nuclear-norm-based regularizer, respectively. This is, essentially,
training a neural network-based solver for the regularization-based
channel estimator, whose performance is hence still subject to the
hand-crafted regularizer. Results therein show a large performance
gap compared to supervised learning. In[28,29], the
authors proposed to minimize the Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (SURE)
objective as a surrogate to the mean-square-error (MSE) loss in order
to approach the accuracy of supervised learning, but the SURE loss
involves a Monte-Carlo approximation, which will degrade the accuracy
of the trained estimator and increase its bias. The performance is
still inferior to supervised training, let alone the oracle performance
bound.

As a golden standard, the MMSE estimator can achieve the Bayes-optimal
accuracy in terms of MSE, but as mentioned in the above discussions,
its implementation requires either a perfect knowledge of the prior
distribution[5,30], or learning such a distribution
from a substantial number of ground-truth channels[23,15],
both of which are difficult, if not impossible, to realize in near-field
HMIMO systems. In addition, computational complexity is again a significant
issue. Even the linear MMSE (LMMSE) estimator still contains a general
matrix inverse that consumes a significant amount of computational
budget[31]. The existing works on HMIMO channel estimation
mainly focused on the low-complexity alternatives to the MMSE estimator.
In[5], a subspace-based channel estimation algorithm
was proposed, in which the low-rank property of the HMIMO spatial
correlation was exploited without full knowledge of the spatial correlation.
In[32], a discrete Fourier transform (DFT)-based HMIMO
channel estimator was proposed based on a circulant matrix-based approximation
of the spatial correlation matrix. Nevertheless, such an algorithm
was limited to the uniform linear array (ULA)-based HMIMO systems,
and cannot be extended to more general antenna array geometries. In[33], angular domain channel sparsity was exploited for
the design of compressed sensing (CS)-based channel estimators in
holographic reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS)-aided wireless
systems, but such a nice property dose not hold in the considered
near-field region. In[30], a concise tutorial of HMIMO
channel modeling and estimation was presented. Even though the aforementioned
estimators significantly outperform the conventional LS scheme, there
still exists quite a large gap from that of the Bayes-optimal MMSE
estimator.

SECTION: I-BContributions

The target of this paper is thus to establish an efficient and Bayes-optimal
channel estimator for near-field HMIMO systems that operates in an
arbitrary unknown EM environment, circumventing the
need for priors or supervision. The main contributions are summarized
as follows.

We introduce anunsupervisedDL framework that validates
the feasibility of establishing Bayes-optimal channel estimators solely
based on theStein’s score functionof the received pilot
signals and the estimated noise level.

We then devise practical algorithms to obtain the two key ingredients
of the unsupervised Bayes-optimal estimator, i.e., the score function
and the noise level. For the former, we propose to train a neural
network-based parameterized score function with the denoising score
matching loss. As for the latter, we exploit the low-rankness of the
near-field spatial correlation to build a principal component analysis
(PCA)-based noise level estimator. The theoretical underpinnings are
discussed along with the algorithms.

We propose score-based channel estimators for near-field HMIMO systems
with both the fully-digital and hybrid analog-digital architectures.
For fully-digital transceivers, the Bayes-optimal estimator is as
simple as a sum of the received pilot signals and the rescaled score
function by the estimated noise level. As for the hybrid analog-digital
architecture, we insert the proposed score-based estimator into iterative
message passing algorithms, and propose an efficient technique to
reduce their complexity. A complexity analysis shows that the algorithms
in both setups are only dominated by the matrix-vector product.

Extensive numerical results demonstrate that the proposed score-based
estimator is indeed quasi-optimal when compared to the oracle performance
bound. In addition, the robustness and the generalization capability
are validated in different system configurations. Furthermore, thanks
to the unsupervised nature, the proposed estimator can automatically
adapt to dynamic environments with varying channel distributions,
which justifies its practical value.

SECTION: I-CPaper Organization and Notation

The remaining parts of the article are organized as follows. In SectionII, we introduce the statistical channel
model and the system model for near-field HMIMO systems. In SectionIII, we first discuss the
general framework and the two core techniques of the score-based estimator,
i.e., the unsupervised learning of the score function and the PCA-based
noise level estimation. Then, in SectionIV,
we respectively present the algorithms for the fully-digital, as well
as the hybrid analog-digital systems. In SectionV,
extensive simulation results are presented to illustrate the advantages
of our proposal in terms of performance, generalization, and robustness.
In SectionVI, we conclude the paper
and discuss future directions.

Notation:is a scalar.,,
andare the trace, the-norm, and the-th entry of a vector, respectively.,,,,are the transpose, Hermitian, real part, imaginary
part, and the-th entry of a matrix, respectively.andare the complex and the real Gaussian distributions with meanand covariance, respectively.is an identity
matrix with appropriate size.

SECTION: IIHMIMO Channel and System Models

SECTION: II-AChannel Model for Near-Field HMIMO

Consider the uplink of an HMIMO system where the base station (BS)
is equipped with a uniform linear array (ULA)111The applicability of the proposed score-based algorithms
extends beyond the ULA model and encompasses various array configurations.
As one will see from SectionIII,
the derivation of the algorithms rely solely on the low-rank property
of the near-field spatial correlation matrix, rather than the specific
array geometries. The ULA-based channel model was adopted because,
at the time of preparing this paper, we could only find one reference
in the literature, namely[34], on the near-field spatial
correlation for HMIMO systems.with thousands of compactly packed antennas with spacingsbeing much smaller than half of the carrier wavelength,
i.e.,, as illustrated in Fig.1.
The BS is assumed to simultaneously serve multiple single-antenna
users. We define a Cartesian coordinate system at the center of the
ULA (i.e., the reference antenna), denoted by. Similarly,
we denote the position of the-th antennaas. The propagation characteristics of the channel
differ in the (radiating) near-field and far-field regions, whose
boundary is determined by the Rayleigh distance,
whererefers to the number of antennas. Due to the joint effect
of the array aperture and the carrier wavelength, the near-field region
is non-negligible in HMIMO systems, which, compared to the traditional
far-field setup, is a paradigm shift that brings new degrees-of-freedom
(DoFs) for communications[12,19].

When there are infinitely many multi-paths, it follows from the central
limit theorem that the channel between the HMIMO and a particular
user, i.e.,, can be modeled
by the correlated Rayleigh fading222Similar to[5,30,32],
in this work, we have also adopted the correlated Rayleigh fading
model. In addition to its mathematical tractability, this choice of
channel model enables the straightforward derivation of the oracle
MMSE performance bound, which serves as an important benchmark for
assessing whether the proposed algorithms have achieved Bayes-optimal
performance.as[5,30,35]

which is solely determined by the spatial correlation,
with subscript NF denoting the near-field. This model has been and
still is the foundation of most theoretical research in HMIMO systems[2,5]. It has been further established in[34]that, while the number of scatterers tends to infinity, the near-field
spatial correlation for HMIMO has a generic integral expression, given
by

wheredenotes the average received power at the reference
antenna,denotes the position of a scatterer
in the support of random scatterers,refers to the distance between scattererand the-th
antenna element, andis the probability density function
(PDF) of the scatterer location, called thepower location
spectrum (PLS). The expression (2)
holds true for any PLS.

To gain further insights, we consider a specific,
named the generalized one-ring model, assuming that the scatterers
are located on a ring whose center is freely positioned, as shown
in Fig. 1. We denote the radius and the angular direction of the ring
asand, respectively.
The coordinate of the ring center is given by,
whereis the distance between the origin and the ring center.
The location of a certain scatterer on the ring is then given by,
whereis the angular position of the scatterer
on the ring. We notice that in a certain EM environment in which,, andare given, the distancein
(2) reduces to a function of,
given by

so as, which reduces to. Plugging (3)
into (2), whenis satisfied,
the near-field spatial correlationcan be
approximately simplified as

according to[34, Lemma 2]. Hereandare respectively defined asand, whileandare determined similarly. For the ease of simulations,
we utilize the particular von-Mises distribution forto
model the scatterer distribution on the ring, given by[36]

in whichdenotes the zeroth-order Bessel function
of the first kind, whileandare
the two parameters determining the concentration and the mean of the
distribution, respectively. The distribution is the circular analog
of the normal distribution. Whenis zero, the distribution
is uniform, while whenis large, the distribution becomes
concentrated about the angle. After plugging (5)
into (4), the integration can
be computed numerically by Monte-Carlo methods to obtain the near-field
spatial correlation.

By contrast, the far-field spatial correlationis characterized by the following integration[32,34],
i.e.,

in whichis the angle of arrival (AoA), andis thepower angular spectrum (PAS)characterizing the power
distribution over different AoAs[34]. In particular,
in isotropic scattering environments where the multi-paths are uniformly
distributed,has a closed-form expression,
i.e.,[37]

Otherwise, in non-isotropic scattering environments,can also be obtained through numerical integration.

The differences between the near-field and the far-field spatial correlations
are two-fold. First,is solely determined
by the PAS,, whereasrelies
not only on the AoAs but also on the scatterers’ positions, denoted
as the PLS,. Second, althoughexhibits spatial wide-sense stationarity, as evidenced bybeing solely dependent on array index difference,, this stationary
characteristic does not generally apply to.
Whenholds
true, the two expressions are approximately equal, i.e.,,
but in other cases, the exact near-field correlationmust be taken into account. For better illustration, we plot a visualized
comparison ofandin Fig.2. It is observed that
the element of the far-field spatial correlationis solely determined by the index difference, which is called
the spatial stationarity property. By contrast, such a property does
not hold for the near-field spatial correlation, whose elementdepends explicitly on both indexesand. Also, the near-field
correlationresults in a non-uniform average
power distribution among the antennas. We also compare
the spatial correlation matrices for both the HMIMO ()
and the nominal MIMO systems (). It
is demonstrated that, in both the far-field and the near-field cases,
the HMIMO systems exhibit a much stronger spatial correlation compared
with the MIMO counterpart. The rank of the spatial correlation matrix
is the lowest in the near-field HMIMO case, indicating the strongest
correlation.

SECTION: II-BSystem Model for Near-Field HMIMO

We introduce the system model for the near-field HMIMO. We mainly
consider two mainstream transceiver architectures, i.e., the fully-digital
and the hybrid analog-digital ones[38]. We assume orthogonal
pilots are utilized and hence focus on a specific user without loss
of generality. In the uplink channel estimation, the user sends pilots
to the BS fortime slots. The received pilot signals,,
at time slotis

whereis the
pilot combining matrix,is the pilot symbol, andrefers to the additive white Gaussian noise. Aftertime slots
of pilot transmission, the received pilot signals are,
in which,,
and the noiseis obtained similarly and whitened
as[29]. In fully-digital HMIMO systems, the number of radio
frequency chains is equal to that of antennas, i.e.,.
We may set the combiner as, and the system
model reduces to[5,30,32]. In contrast, in hybrid analog-digital
systems, the pilot combing matrix is the product of ananalog/holographic
combiner333The overall architecture of the hybrid analog-digital
transceivers are similar for the HMIMO[8]and the MIMO
systems[39]. The difference mainly lies in how the analog
combiners are implemented physically. Specifically, in the HMIMO systems,
the analog/holographic combiners are often implemented by low-cost
metasurfaces[8], while in the MIMO systems, the analog
combiners are mostly implemented by traditional phase shifters[39].and a digital combiner,
i.e.,[8,39]. Notice that the combiners cannot be optimally
tuned without knowledge of the channel. Without loss of generality,
we consider an arbitrary scenario in which the digital combineris configured as identity, and the elements of theanalog/holographic
combinerare randomly selected from
one-bitquantized anglesfor the energy efficiency
considerations[23,31]. The elements offollowthe same distribution as,
that is.
As most of the existing deep learning libraries handle real-valued
inputs, we transform the received pilot signals into a equivalent
real-valued form,

in which,,,with.

Given the fact thatholds in hybrid analog-digital
systems and a small pilot overhead, the measurement matrixis often a fat matrix with. This means that the
dimension ofis smaller than that of the channels,
which renders channel estimation an under-determined problem with
infinitely many possible solutions. This necessitates the use of the
prior knowledge of the channelin some forms to reach
a high-quality solution. By contrast, sincein
fully-digital transceivers, it is good enough to simply setin the channel estimation stage. In such a scenario,is a square matrix, i.e.,, and the system model becomes

which reduces to a denoising problem. Nevertheless, to achieve competitive
estimation performance, it is essential to leverage the prior of the
channel, not to mention the Bayes-optimal MMSE estimator,
which typically requires full knowledge of the prior distribution.

However, the grand challenge is that, we actually have very limited
prior knowledge of the channelin real environments,
let alone characterizing its full prior distribution. As mentioned
in SectionI, previous works either attempt
to adopt simplified priors, e.g., based on sparsity and low-rankness,
or introduce the postulated ones, e.g., by using mixture distributions,
which, however, can only characterize limited aspects of the channel
feature, and hence often result in sub-optimal performance. On the
other hand, existing DL methods mostly rely on a supervised dataset
of ground-truth channels, which are hardly available
in practice. Hence, in the next section, we study how to achieveBayes-optimalchannel estimation without priors or supervision, which is extremely
important in practice.

SECTION: IIIGeneral Frameworks of the Score-Based Channel Estimator

In this section, we propose general frameworks and enabling techniques
of the Bayes-optimal score-based channel estimator. We first consider
the fully-digital transceivers and derive the closed-form expression
of the Bayes-optimal channel estimator solely based on the received
pilot signals. Next, we propose techniques to acquire
the two crucial elements of the estimator, namely the score function
and the noise level, based on score matching and PCA, respectively.

SECTION: III-ABridging MMSE Estimation with the Score Function

In this subsection, we first focus on the fully-digital system model,
i.e., (10). Extension to hybrid
analog-digital HMIMO systems will be presented in SectionIV-B.

Our target is a Bayes-optimal channel estimator,,
that minimizes the mean-square-error (MSE), i.e.,

where the expectation above is taken with respect to (w.r.t.) the
unknown channel, whileis
the posterior density. Taking the derivative of the above equation
w.r.t.and nulling it, we reach the Bayes-optimal,
i.e., minimum MSE (MMSE), channel estimator, given by

whereis the joint density, andis the measurement density obtained via marginalization, i.e.,

The last equality holds since the likelihood functionexpressesas a convolution between the prior distributionand the i.i.d. Gaussian noise. Taking the derivative
of both sides of (13) w.r.t.gives

Dividing both sides of (14) w.r.t.results in the following:

where the second equality holds owing to the Bayes’
theorem, and the last equality holds due to (12)
and. By rearranging
the terms and plugging in,
we reach the foundation of the proposed algorithm:

in whichis called theStein’s
score functionin statistics[40]. Based on (16),
we notice that the Bayes-optimal MMSE channel estimator could be achievedsolely based on the received pilot signals,
without having access to the prior distributionor
a supervised training dataset consisting of the ground-truth channels, which are both unavailable in practice. With efficient
estimators of the noise leveland the score
function, the Bayes-optimal
MMSE channel estimator can be computed in a closed form with extremely
low complexity. In the following, we discuss how to utilize the machine
learning tools to obtain an accurate estimation of them basedsolelyon.

The above derivation depends on the nice properties of the additive
white Gaussian noise, i.e.,,
which is the most commonly seen noise distribution in MIMO systems
and has been widely adopted in the previous works on HMIMO channel
estimation[5,30,32]. Nevertheless, one
can easily see that it also holds when the noise follows correlated
Gaussian distribution444The correlated noise could be observed as electromagnetic interference
in holographic RIS-assisted wireless systems[37]., e.g.,, by
replacingin (16) with the
covariance matrix. Furthermore, when the environment
contains some long-tailed Cauchy noise[41], the extension
can also be derived using a similar procedure[42].
We omit further discussion here due to the limited space.

SECTION: III-BUnsupervised Learning of the Score Function

We discuss how to get the score function.
Given that a closed-form expression is intractable to acquire, we
instead aim to achieve a parameterized function with a neural network,
and discuss how to train it based on score matching. We first introduce
the denoising anto-encoder (DAE)[40], the core of the
training process, and explain how to utilize it to approximate the
score function.

To obtain the score function,
the measurementis treated as the target signal that
the DAE should denoise. The general idea is to obtain the score functionbased on its analytical relationship
with the DAE of, which will be established later inTheorem2. We first construct a
noisy version of the target signalbymanuallyadding some additive white Gaussian noise,,
whereandcontrols the noise level555Note that the extra noise is only added during the training process.,
and then train a DAE todenoisethe manually added noise.
The DAE, denoted by, is trained by
the-loss function.Theorem 2explains the relationship of the score function
and the DAE.

The optimal DAE,,
behaves asymptotically as

Please refer to[40, Appendix A].
∎

The above theorem illustrates that, for a sufficiently small,
we can approximate the score function based on the DAE by,
assuming that parameter of the DAE,, is near-optimal,
i.e.,. Nevertheless, the
approximation can be numerically unstable as the denominator,,
is close to zero. To alleviate the problem, we improve the structure
of the DAE and rescale the original loss function.

First, we consider a residual form of the DAE with a scaling factor.
Specifically, let.
Plugging it into (17), the score function is approximately
equal to

This reparameterization enablesto approximate the score function directly, thereby circumventing
the requirement for division that may lead to numerical instability.
In addition, the residual link significantly enhances the denoising
capability of DAE, as it can easily learn an identity mapping[43].

Second, since the varianceof the manually added
noise is small, the gradient of the original-loss function,
i.e.,,
can easily vanish to zero and may further lead to difficulties in
training. Hence, we rescale the loss function by a factor ofto safeguard the vanishing gradient issue, i.e.,

where (18) is plugged into the loss function.The expectation is taken with respect toand.

We are interested in the region whereis sufficiently
close to zero, in which casecan
be deemed equal to the score functionaccording to (18). Nevertheless, directly
training the network using a very smallis difficult
since the SNR of the gradient signal decreases in a linear ratewith respect to, which introduces difficulty for the
stochastic gradient descent[44]. To exploit the asymptotic
optimality of the score function approximation when,
we propose to simultaneously train a networkconditioned on varyingvalues in each epoch, such that
it can handle variouslevels and generalize to the desired
region, i.e.,.
To achieve the goal, we linearly anneal the level of the added noisefrom
a large value to a small one in each epoch. That is, weconditionon the manually added noise
levelduring training.

The proposed algorithm is described inAlgorithm 1. The DAE
is trained with a stochastic gradient descent forepochs. In
each epoch, we draw a random vectorand annealto control the extra noise level according to the current number of
iterations. Then, the scaled DAE loss functionin (19) is minimized by stochastic gradient
descent. Note that in the training process, nothing but a dataset
of the received pilot signalsis necessary, which is
readily available in practice. In the inference stage, one can apply
formula (16) to compute the score-based MMSE estimator,
in which the score function can be approximated by using,
i.e., settingas zero, and noise level() can be
estimated by the PCA-based algorithm in the next subsection.

SECTION: III-CPCA-Based Noise Level Estimation

We propose a low-complexity PCA-based algorithm to estimate the noise
levelrequired in (16) based
ona single instanceof the received pilot signals,
while the mean, i.e., the ground-truth HMIMO channel,
is completely unknown. Mathematically, the problem is to estimatefrom a single realization of a multivariate
Gaussian distribution with unknown mean, which is certainly an intractable
problem if the mean, i.e., the HMIMO channel, does not have any particular
structure. In the following, we first motivate the idea by analyzing
the HMIMO spatial correlation matrix, and then present the proposed
PCA-based algorithm, i.e.,Algorithm 2.

The basic idea behind is the low-rank property of the spatial correlation
matrixof HMIMO due to the dense deployment of the antenna
elements, which introduces a strong correlation between adjacent antenna
elements. For example, for far-field isotropic scattering environments,
the rank of the correlation matrixis
roughly[4]. It decreases with the shrink of antenna spacing
and the increase of the carrier frequency. For example, when,
around 80% of the eigenvalues ofshrink
towards zero. The rank deficiency phenomenon of the spatial correlation
matrix tends to be even more prominent in non-isotropic scattering
environments[30], particularly in the near-field region[45]. For example, for the same near-field system configurations
as Fig.2(a), more than 95%
of the eigenvalues ofare close to zero.
Hence, we propose to make use of the low-rankness of the HMIMO spatial
correlation to estimate.

We present the PCA-based algorithm by using an illustrative example.
Following the same setting as Fig.2(a),
we generate an HMIMO channel sampleand the corresponding
received pilot signalswhen the
received SNR is 0 dB. We reshapeinto their corresponding square tensors,
and plotted the heat map ofas shown in Fig.3(a). We then decomposeintovirtual subarray tensors by using
a sliding window of shape, and then
reshape them back intovectors, i.e.,.
Similarly, the noiseless channeland the noisecan also be decomposed asand, and
should satisfy

Thanks to the low-rank property of the near-field spatial correlation, the decomposed virtual subarray channelsshould also
lie in a low-dimensional subspace. In Fig.3(b),
we plot the eigenvalues of the covariance matrices of the received
pilot signalscorresponding to the decomposed virtual subarray channelsin descending order, with a reference line that marks the noise level. As observed
in the figure, the eigenvalues ofshrink to zero with only about 10 principal dimensions. The zero eigenvalues
correspond to the redundant dimensions. By contrast, we observe that
the eigenvalues of the covariance ofare concentrated aroundin the redundant
dimensions. This example suggests that it is possible to estimate
the noise level based on the redundant eigenvalues, which can be shown
to follow a Gaussian distribution by using the following theorem.
The above manipulations correspond to lines 3 to 7 inAlgorithm
2.

The redundant eigenvalues of the covariance ofis Gaussian distributed with variance.

Please refer to AppendixA.
∎

The above theorem motivates us to first separate the principal and
the redundant dimensions, and then estimate the noise levelbased on the redundant ones. In fact, the principal and redundant
eigenvalues could be separated by an iterative process. Assuming that
the eigenvalue setcould be divided into two subsetsandsuch that,
whereis the set of the principal eigenvalues andconsists of the redundant eigenvalues. We first
assume thatand,
and iteratively move elements fromtoas long as the condition that, the mean ofis also
the median of it, is not satisfied, as realized by lines 8 to 14 inAlgorithm 2666If the ’if’ statement in line 11 is never satisfied, the estimated
noise is set aswhen,
corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue.. If the redundant eigenvalues, following a Gaussian distribution,
could be successfully sorted out, we can then simply resort to the
sample standard deviation, which is the minimum variance unbiased
estimator, to estimate the noise level.
It has been proved in[46]that, such a method offers
an accurate estimate of the noise level, as long as the principal
dimension is not too large compared to the overall dimension, which
can be easily satisfied by the near-field HMIMO channel since the
rank of the spatial correlation matrices is extremely low. Empirically,
we conclude that adopting asliding window is enough to
offer an accurate estimate when. More experimental evaluations
will be presented in SectionV.

SECTION: IVPractical Algorithms of the Score-Based Channel Estimator

In this section, we present and analyze practical algorithms for the
proposed score-based channel estimator. We first focus on the fully-digital
systems in SectionIV-A,
and then discuss how to extend it to hybrid analog-digital transceivers
based on iterative message passing algorithms in SectionIV-B.
Lastly, we analyze the computational complexity.

SECTION: IV-AScore-Based Estimator in Fully-Digital Systems

The procedure of the score-based estimator in fully-digital near-field
HMIMO systems is summarized inAlgorithm 3. In the offline
stage, the BS first collects a dataset of received pilot signalsto train the DAE neural networkbyAlgorithm
1. This will cost no additional overhead for the spectral resources,
and also does not require knowledge of the noise level. At the online
inference stage,Algorithm 3requires the received pilot
signals, the well-trained DAE parameters,
and the shape of the sliding window for estimating the noise level. As an initialization, we first employ
the trained DAE networkto approximate the score function
using.
Then,Algorithm 2is executed to obtain the estimated noise
level. Finally, we plug the estimated noise level and the score function
into (16) to compute the estimated channel. We shall
analyze the complexity in SectionIV-C,
which is extremely low since no costly matrix inversion is required.

In particular, it is worth noting that the algorithm does not require
any kind of the prior knowledge of the channel or the noise statistics.
Only the received pilot signalsare required in both
the training and the inference stages. Furthermore, only the DAE networkis parameterized in this algorithm, whose training
is unsupervised. Hence, when the EM environment is dynamic, one can
keep updating the parametersin an online manner to
track the changes so as to adapt to the new channel distribution,
which will be discussed later in SectionV-F.

SECTION: IV-BScore-Based Estimator in Hybrid Analog-Digital Systems

In this section, we shift the focus to the more general hybrid analog-digital
HMIMO systems. We first introduce the general design principle based
on iterative message passing algorithms and explain the practical
difficulties in applying such methods. Then, we discuss how the score-based
estimator and the PCA-based noise level estimation serve as a perfect
match to tackle these challenges and enable Bayes-optimal channel
estimation for HMIMO in unknown EM environments.

For hybrid analog-digital transceivers, we consider the general system
model (9) for CS-based
channel estimation. Under such circumstances, Bayes-optimal estimation
can be achieved by orthogonal AMP (OAMP)777The Bayes-optimality of OAMP necessitates the measurement matrixto be right-unitarily-invariant[47], which covers a large
set of random matrices and can be easily satisfied sincein the channel estimation depends on the received pilot combiners
which can be manually configured.[47,48], an iterative algorithm with the following
update rules consisting of a linear estimator (LE) and a non-linear
estimator (NLE), i.e.,

where the LE is constructed to be de-correlated and the NLE is designed
to be a divergence-free function[47]. We say that the LE
is de-correlated whenholds, while the divergence-free function can be constructed from
an arbitrary function after subtracting its divergence[47].
When both the LE and the NLE are locally MMSE optimal, the replica
Bayes-optimality of the OAMP algorithm was conjectured in[47]and rigorously proved in[49]. The term ‘orthogonal’
in the name of OAMP derives from the fact that when the conditions
of the LE and the NLE are satisfied, the error after the LE, i.e.,, consists
of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) zero-mean Gaussian
elements independent of, and at the same time, the error
after the NLE, i.e.,,
consists of i.i.d. entries independent ofand[47]. Hence, we have that in the-th iteration,

in whichis the ground-truth HMIMO channel, andis the effective i.i.d. Gaussian noise vector withdenoting the noise level. Hence, the NLE should be the Bayes-optimal
MMSE denoiser to estimatefrom,
which is essentially the same as the score-based estimator for fully-digital
systems proposed in SectionIV-A.
In addition, the LE should be the linear MMSE (LMMSE) estimator withbeing the LMMSE matrix given by

The coefficientis multiplied to ensure that the LE is de-correlated. The final estimated
channel afteriterations is, which, when
converged, is the Bayes-optimal solution.

Although sounds promising, there are a number of challenges that have
hindered the application of OAMP to near-field HMIMO channel estimation.

First, the complexity incurred by the LE is prohibitive when the dimension
of the channelbecomes extremely
large in near-field HMIMO systems, as it requires inverting ageneral matrix in each iteration, causing a complexity at the order
of. This is exceedingly large. Second, the noise
statistics is unknown. The levelof the Gaussian
noisein the EM environment should be accurately estimated
in the first place. Otherwise, both the LE and the NLE cannot be effectively
computed. Third, the optimal MMSE estimator in the NLE cannot be constructed
without knowledge of the prior distribution of the HMIMO channel,
which, however, is generally not available in practice given the complicated
distribution of the near-field HMIMO channel. One should circumvent
the prior distribution by other techniques so as to implement the
MMSE estimator. In the following, we discuss the practical design
of the LE and the NLE to tackle these challenges mainly on the basis
of the proposed techniques.

The LMMSE matrix in the LE, i.e., (23), requires
the computation of a general matrix inverse with prohibitive complexity.
For a general measurement matrix, the matrix inverse
is essential but could be greatly simplified by using the singular
value decomposition (SVD) of, i.e.,,
where bothandare orthogonal matrices,
andis a diagonal matrix. Plugging the SVD ofinto (23), we can get the following results
after some algebra, i.e.,

Thanks to the SVD operation, we no longer need to calculate a general
matrix inverse like (23) in every iteration. Instead, the new expression requires computing the SVD of matrixonly once888The SVD ofcan be pre-computed and cached.,
and the computation of (24) becomes much simpler,
sinceis diagonal. The complexity of the inverse is cut down drastically
fromto.

Having solved the complexity issue, another problem is that both the
environmental Gaussian noise level of, i.e.,,
and the effective Gaussian noise level of, i.e.,, are both unknown in practice, but should
be frequently used in OAMP. For, it can
be estimated fromafter treatingas a whole, by using the PCA-based estimator
proposed inAlgorithm 2. For,
we propose two possible methods to estimate it. First, sinceis similar to the fully-digital system model, i.e., (10),
we could apply the PCA-based noise level estimator toto get an estimate ofin each iteration.
However, this method requires runningAlgorithm 2once per
iteration, and incurs a high computational complexity. The second
possible option is to utilize the following estimator proposed in[50]for, given by

where the functionreturns the maximum value
of the inputs, andis set as a small positive value to circumvent
numerical instability. The complexity of this approach is much smaller
than the first one since it only involves a simple matrix product,
and the denominatorcan be
pre-computed. Empirically, we observe that these two methods offer
a similar performance. Hence, we pick the latter due to its relative
lower computational complexity.

Based on (22),in each iteration
is the ground-truth channel corrupted by white Gaussian noise,
which is similar to the formulation in fully-digital systems, i.e.,
(10). After treatingasandasinAlgorithm 2, the NLE is the same as the score-based estimator
inIV-A, given by

As the effective noise levelvaries in
different numbers of iterations, we pretrain and store a few sets
of DAE parameters corresponding to different noise levels and then
load different DAE parametersaccording to the estimated
noise level. The complete algorithm
for the score-based estimator in hybrid analog-digital systems is
summarized inAlgorithm 4.

SECTION: IV-CComplexity Analysis

We first discuss the complexity expressions in fully-digital systems
and then extend them to hybrid analog-digital systems.

For fully-digital HMIMO systems, the inference complexity of the proposed
score-based algorithm consists of two parts: the computation of the
score functionand the PCA-based
estimation of the noise level. The former depends
on the specific neural architecture of,
and costs a constant complexity, denoted by, once the network
is trained. For the latter, we analyze the complexity ofAlgorithm
2line by line. The complexity of the virtual subarray decomposition
in line 4 is represented as. The computation of
the mean and covariance in lines 5 and 6 incurs costs ofand, respectively. The eigenvalue decomposition
in line 7 has a complexity of, while sorting
the eigenvalues requires. The eigenvalue splitting
and the noise level estimation, from lines 8 to 14, have a complexity
of. Considering that in HMIMO systems, the approximationholds, the complexity of calculating the variance
term is approximately. Therefore, the
overall complexity for the score-based estimator in fully-digital
HMIMO systems, i.e.,Algorithm 3, is roughly,
which scales linearly with the number of antennas. In practice,
the fluctuation of the received SNR may not be frequent. In such a
case, it is not a necessity to estimate the received SNR for every
instance of the received pilot signals. Therefore, the
actual complexity of the proposed score-based algorithm is within
the range ofand,
which is extremely efficient given the near-optimal performance999Most previous works on channel estimation assume that the received
SNR is perfectly known[5,30,32]. As such,
the complexity reduces to..

For hybrid analog-digital HMIMO systems, we analyze the per-iteration
complexity ofAlgorithm 4. We first analyze the LE. Thanks
to the SVD-based method, we no longer need to compute a costly general
matrix inversion in each iteration. If the SVD of matrixis pre-computed and cached, only the inversion of a diagonal matrix
is required per iteration, which only incurs a complexity of.
Hence, the complexity of the LE is only dominated by the matrix-vector
product with complexity. The overall
complexity of the LE is. For the
NLE, the complexity involves one forward propagation of the neural
network, which is of a constant complexity. Therefore,
theper-iterationcomplexity of the score-based estimator
in hybrid analog-digital systems is,
dominated by the matrix-vector product. In addition, before the iterations,
we need to run the PCA-basedAlgorithm 2only onceto estimate the Gaussian noise level in the environment, which costs.

SECTION: VSimulation Results

SECTION: V-ASimulation Setup

We consider uplink channel estimation in a typical HMIMO system whose
general parameters are listed in TableI.
Specifically, the antenna spacings are configured to be smaller than
the nominal value of half the carrier wavelengthto
model the quasi-continuous aperture in HMIMO systems. In addition,
the distance between the BS and the scatterer ring is set within the
near-field region, i.e.,.

The following baselines are compared in the simulations.

LS: Least squares estimation.

Oracle MMSE: Oracle MMSE is the MMSE estimator that has aperfect knowledgeof both the spatial correlation matrixand the noise level,
given by

Note that since the HMIMO channel follows a correlated Rayleigh fading,
the linear MMSE is the optimal MMSE estimator that provides theBayesian
performance bound. It is also worth noting thatis extremely difficult, if not impossible, to be acquired in practice
since it containsentries and is thus prohibitive to estimate
whenis particularly large in HMIMO systems.

Sample MMSE: Sample MMSE estimator has the same expression
as (27), but replaces the true spatial correlationwith an estimated onebased upon the testing samples, given by[32], in whichis the number of testing samples
andis the-th sample of the received pilots
in the testing dataset. We also utilize theperfectnoise
levelin sample MMSE.

During the training stage, the hyper-parameters in the proposed score-based
estimator are selected as,,,, and. In addition,
we adopt a batch size of 16 and reduce the learning rateby half after every 25 epochs. In the inference stage, the shape of
the sliding window in the PCA-based noise level estimation algorithm
is. The performance is evaluated based on the normalized
MSE (NMSE) on a testing dataset withsamples, i.e.,.
For the neural architecture of the DAE,
we adopt a simplified UNet architecture[51]. Note
that depending on the complexity budget, many other prevailing neural
architectures could also be applied[15]. The SNR definition
in this article refers to the received SNR if not stated otherwise.

In the following, we first evaluate the accuracy of the PCA-based
noise level estimation, which is a crucial component of the proposed
score-based estimator. Subsequently, we provide extensive simulations
for the score-based estimator in both the fully-digital and the hybrid
analog-digital HMIMO systems, in terms of estimation accuracy, sample
complexity, robustness, and online adaptation capability.

SECTION: V-BAccuracy of the PCA-Based Noise Level Estimation

The accuracy of the noise level estimation has an impact on the NMSE
performance of the proposed score-based estimator. Hence, different
from most previous works that have assumed a perfect knowledge of
the noise level, we alleviate such an
assumption and propose a PCA-based method to estimate it. In TableII, we list the estimation accuracy
under different SNRs, wheredenotes
the estimated noise level. The bias, the standard deviation (std),
and the root MSE (RMSE) of the estimator are given by,,
and,
respectively. The RMSE gives an overall assessment of the performance,
while the bias and the std reflect the accuracy and robustness of
different estimators. We also provide the percent error, defined as, to show the
error as a percentage of the true noise level. We compare the proposed
PCA-based method with the following benchmarks.

Sparsity-based: The squared median absolute deviation (MAD)
algorithm for the noise level estimation of sparse signals[52].
Similar to[52], we utilize the estimator
after transforming the channel into the angular domain.

Oracle bound: Assume perfect knowledge of the ground-truth
channel, and estimate the noise level directly
fromby using
sample standard deviation, which is the minimum variance unbiased
estimator.

Since the sparsity-based algorithm was originally proposed for the
complex-valued case, we perform the comparison using the complex-valued
version of the proposed PCA-based method, which offers a similar performance
as the real-valued version.

TableIIcompares the performance of
different noise level estimators. As shown in the table, the proposed
method has a comparable RMSE with the oracle bound and significantly
outperforms the sparsity-based algorithm. The advantages of our proposal
are consistent across different SNR levels, with a negligible percent
error of less than 3%. This indicates that the proposed method can
effectively exploit the low-rank property of the near-field spatial
correlation. By contrast, the sparsity-based algorithm performs poorly
since the near-field HMIMO channel lacks sparsity in the angular domain.
Later, in SectionV-D, we will illustrate
that the proposed score-based channel estimator is robust to SNR estimation
errors, and the accuracy of the PCA-based estimator will cause almost
no performance loss compared to using the true noise level.

SECTION: V-CEstimation Accuracy in Fully-Digital Systems

In Fig.4(a), we plot the NMSE
performance as a function of the received SNRin fully-digital
HMIMO transceivers, in which. We depict two lines
for the proposed score-based estimator. The yellow one refers to the
performance when the PCA-estimated noise level is adopted in (16),
while the purple line corresponds to the case in which the perfect
noise level is utilized. It is observed that these two lines largely
overlap, indicating that the PCA-estimated noise level provides almost
the same performance as the perfect noise level. Additionally, the
proposed score-based algorithm significantly outperforms the LS and
the sample MMSE estimators by over 10 dB and 5 dB, respectively, in
terms of NMSE, and achieves arguably the same NMSE performance (with
a negligible 0.6 dB drop) as the oracle MMSE performance bound. The
competitive results are consistent in different SNR ranges. Notice
that the oracle MMSE method utilizes the true covariance and noise
level, but the proposed method requires neither. This demonstrates
the strong capability of the unsupervised score-based estimator to
achieve a near-Bayes-optimal performance without any oracle information
in unknown EM environments.

SECTION: V-DRobustness to Noise Level Estimation Errors

In Fig.4(b), we illustrate the
how the accuracy of the estimated noise level will affect the performance
of the proposed score-based estimator. In the simulations, the true
noise level is set as, corresponding
to an SNR of 10 dB. We vary the adopted values ofin (16) within,
and plot the corresponding NMSE performance curve in blue. Particularly,
we utilize red and green dots to denote the NMSE achieved with the
estimated and true SNR values, respectively. The LS and the oracle
MMSE algorithms are presented as the performance upper and lower bounds.
It is observed that even when an inexact received SNR is adopted,
the performance of the score-based algorithm is still quite robust
and significantly outperforms the LS method. Also, the estimated received
SNR by the PCA-based method is accurate enough to offer a near-optimal
performance, even in unknown EM environments.

SECTION: V-ESample Complexity

In Fig.4(c), we study the sample
complexity of the proposed score-based estimator, where the NMSE is
shown as a function of the number of training samples. The received
SNR when plotting the figure is 10 dB. We notice that the gap between
the proposed score-based estimator and the oracle MMSE bound gradually
vanishes whenincreases. The NMSE gap shrinks to less than 1
dB at, and further reduces to less than 0.5 dB when.
The sample complexity curve of the proposed estimator follows a similar
trend as the sample MMSE method, whose performance both starts to
saturate asreaches 10,000. Additionally, we are also interested
in the low-sample region when fewer than 1,000 training samples are
available. The region is zoomed in and shown in the subfigure. It
is observed that, the score-based estimator can bring a 2 dB margin
with onlytraining samples, and further bring a 6 dB advantage
withsamples, as compared to the LS estimator. This confirms
that the effectiveness of the proposal in different sample regions.
As a final comment, we emphasize again that the training process is
totally unsupervised and only the received pilot signalsare required.

SECTION: V-FOnline Adaptation in Dynamic Environments

Since the proposed score-based method is unsupervised, and only requires
the received pilot signalsduring training, it is possible
to update the network parametersin an online manner
to adapt to the dynamic EM environments. To illustrate the idea, we
consider a dynamic environment as shown in Fig.5(a),
which labels three possible positions of the scatterers. We assume
that the scatterers gradually move from positions 1 to 3 to model
the dynamic EM environment, and that each position lasts for 2,000
pilot transmission slots.

We keep runningAlgorithm 1so as to update the parameters
of the network parametersof the score function. Since
the received pilot signalsarrive one by one in an online
manner, we utilize a batch size of 1 and update the network parameters
once a new sample is received. In addition, we also change the hyper-parameters
to,,,
and keep the learning rateconstant.

In Fig.5(a), we illustrate the
3 positions of the scatterer ring with different values of direction, radius, and distance, which are labeled in Fig.5(b). We depict the online adaptation
performance as a function of the number of pilot transmission slots.
We assume that the parameters of the network, i.e.,,
are well trained offline for position 1 as described in SectionV-A.
By contrast, the scatterer rings in positions 2 and 3 are never seen
before in the offline training stage, but suddenly appear in online
deployment. For clarity, we zoom in the transition phase between different
scatterer positions.

From the results in position 1, it is observed that the online adaptation
will not have negative influence on the performance of the well-trained
network parameters. During the transition phase from
positions 1 to 2, we first observe an abrupt increase in NMSE. However,
after a few pilot transmission slots, the online adaptation algorithm
quickly recovers the performance to a remarkable level that is close
to the oracle MMSE bound. The performance improves steadily with more
samples. A quite similar curve also appears during the transition
from positions 2 to 3. These results confirm the effectiveness of
the proposed score-based estimator in handling the uncertainties in
the EM environments, which is crucial in practical deployment. The
running time complexity of the online adaptation process is less than
0.01 s per sample on a Nvidia A40 GPU. This ensures a real-time adaptation
to dynamic environments.

SECTION: V-GEstimation Accuracy in Hybrid Analog-Digital Systems

In Fig.6(a), we plot the
NMSE as a function of the received SNR when the under-sampling ratioequals 0.3 in hybrid analog-digital HMIMO transceivers.
We find that under such a low under-sampling ratio, the performance
gain of the sample MMSE algorithm is marginal as compared to the LS
estimator. By contrast, the performance of the proposed score-based
method still remains close to the oracle MMSE bound across different
SNR levels. As observed, the gap to the oracle bound becomes slighter
larger in the high SNR region. Nevertheless, it is still significantly
better than other baselines.

In Fig.6(b), we illustrate
the NMSE performance at different number of iterations when the under-sampling
ratiois 0.5 in hybrid analog-digital systems.
As observed from the figure, the score-based OAMP algorithm converges
rapidly to the oracle bound within only about 5 iterations, which
proves its supreme efficiency and validates our convergence analysis.
It is also interesting to notice that the NMSE is monotonically decreasing
with more iterations. This enables a flexible trade-off between complexity
and performance.

In Fig.6(c), we examine
the effectiveness of the score-based OAMP algorithm under different
under-sampling ratios when the received SNR is set as 0 dB. The performance
trend of the our proposal aligns well with the oracle bound. The gap
vis-a-vis the bound is consistently smaller than 0.5 dB even under
extremely small under-sampling ratios, e.g.,.
This indicates that our proposed method can seamlessly generalize
to the different pilot lengthsthat may be encountered in practice.
It is also interesting to observe that, the NMSE of both curves decreases
quickly when the under-sampling ratio increases from 0 to 0.4, and
gradually saturates thereafter. This confirms that the pilot overhead
for near-field HMIMO channel estimation can be significantly reduced
with proper prior information about the channel. The similar NMSE
trend to the oracle bound also indicates that the score-based method
leads to a near-optimal pilot overhead, and confirms that it effectively
learns the prior distribution of the near-field HMIMO channel in a
totally unsupervised manner.

SECTION: V-HRuntime Complexity

In SectionIV-C, we
have analyzed the complexity of the proposed algorithms. To offer
a more straightforward comparison, we further provide the runtime
complexity. We provide the runtime complexity as a reference. The
system settings are the same as listed in TableI.
The under-sampling ratio is set asfor hybrid
analog-digital systems. The proposed score-based algorithm is set
to terminate after 5 iterations in hybrid analog-digital systems.

In the fully digital systems, both the oracle MMSE
and the sample MMSE methods necessitate the computation of a high-dimensional
() matrix inversion, whose complexity is in the order
of. The runtime is therefore exceedingly high
in HMIMO systems. By contrast, as analyzed in SectionIV-C,
the proposed score-based method eliminates the matrix inversion and
exhibits a linear complexity with respect to the number of antennas.
Hence, the runtime is significantly shorter.

In the hybrid analog-digital systems, high-dimensional
matrix inverse is still necessary for the MMSE methods, but the dimension
is decreased to(),
leading to a complexity of.
It is still quite large, though shorter than that in fully-digital
systems. By contrast, the complexity of the proposed score-based estimator
is only dominated by the matrix-vector product as analyzed in SectionIV-C, which is much shorter compared
to the MMSE methods. The simulation results also support our analysis.

SECTION: V-IPerformance under the Mutual Coupling Effect

The mutual coupling (MC) effect will become stronger
with the densely placed antenna elements in HMIMO systems. Hence,
we provide additional experiments to illustrative that effectiveness
of our proposed methods under the MC effect. The MC matrixis defined as[53]

whereis the reference antenna impedance, anddenotes the S-parameter matrix of an antenna array, calculated based
on the specific array geometry by using EM simulation tools. Specifically,
we resort to the Antenna Toolbox in Matlab. We refer the readership
to[54]for the detailed calculation process. In the
simulations, we utilize the same system parameters described in TableI, and define the HMIMO as a dipole
ULA with an element length ofand width
of. We assume that,
which is equal to the real-valued port generator resistance[55].
Under the MC effect, the effective channel is

withbeing the near-field HMIMO channel as defined
in (1). The effective NF channel should follow,
whereis the effective channel covariance. Similarly, we also transforminto its real-valued equivalent.
The goal becomes the estimation of the effective channel,
instead of the original channel. However, it is worth
noting that the system model and the mathematical problem behind both
remain unchanged. Therefore, the proposed score-based algorithms can
be directly applied to estimate the effective channel under the MC
effect.

In Fig.7, we depict the
NMSE performance as a function of the received SNRin fully-digital
HMIMO transceivers under the MC effect101010The effect of MC on antenna efficiency does not
appear in Fig.7because we are analyzing
the received SNR instead of the transmit SNR.. Different from the previous simulations, we re-generate
datasets using theeffective channelthat
takes MC into account, and train the proposed score-based methods
using the received pilot signals. We compare our proposal with two
oracle MMSE benchmarks. One disregards the MC effect and utilizes
the original NF spatial correlationin (27).
By contrast, the second one considers the MC effect and utilizes the
effective covarianceinstead of.
As observed, these two bounds are close in the low and the mid SNR
regions, while the performance loss of disregarding the MC effect
becomes more apparent in the high SNR scenario. In addition, it is
observed that the proposed score-based methods can still offer the
near Bayes-optimal performance, similar to the oracle MMSE bound considering
the MC effect. This is because the score function estimator is trained
in a unsupervised manner using the received pilot signals,
which naturally incorporate the distortion caused by the MC effect.

SECTION: VIConclusions and Future Directions

Leveraging the connection between the MMSE estimator and the score-function,
in this paper, we proposed an innovative unsupervised learning framework
for channel estimation in near-field HMIMO systems. Different from
existing methods, the proposed algorithms are trained solely based
on the received pilots, without requiring any kind of prior knowledge
of the HMIMO channel or the noise statistics. This enables it to work
in arbitrary and unknown EM environments that may appear in real-world
deployment. The key components of the proposed framework, i.e., learning
the score function, the PCA-based noise level estimation, and the
iterative message passing algorithms, are presented along with theoretical
underpinnings. Extensive simulation results have demonstrated that
our proposal can achieve promising performance in both fully-digital
and hybrid analog-digital systems, reaching an NMSE value close to
the oracle MMSE bound with significant reduction in complexity. Furthermore,
we provided relevant simulation results to validate its strong robustness
and the online adaptation to dynamic EM environments without any priors
or supervision. The results have clearly proven the effectiveness
of the score-based unsupervised learning framework for designing Bayes-optimal
channel estimators in near-field HMIMO systems. As future directions,
it is interesting to extend our proposal to low-resolution HMIMO transceivers[56]and incorporate advanced meta-learning algorithms
to improve the efficiency of the online adaptation process.

SECTION: Appendix AProof of Theorem3

Define the covariance ofas

in whichis the mean vector. The eigenvalue decomposition ofis given by

We can representby using the eigenvector matrixas a basis, i.e.,,
with. Assuming thatlies in a-dim subspace () and could be represented as, wherewithconsisting of theeigenvectors corresponding to thelargest eigenvalues, we have
that

Multiplying both sides with, we obtain that

in whichfollowsaccording to the property of Gaussian distribution. It is observed
that the noisehas been separated from the measurementby matrix. Hence, the covariance ofis

from which we easily conclude that the redundant eigenvalues follow
a Gaussian distribution with variance.

SECTION: References