SECTION: Inequalities and bounds for expected order statistics from transform-ordered families

We introduce a comprehensive method for establishing stochastic orders among order statistics in the i.i.d. case. This approach relies on the assumption that the underlying distribution is linked to a reference distribution through a transform order. Notably, this method exhibits broad applicability, particularly since several well-known nonparametric distribution families can be defined using relevant transform orders, including the convex and the star transform orders.
Moreover, for convex-ordered families, we show that an application of Jensen’s inequality gives bounds for the probability that a random variable exceeds the expected value of its corresponding order statistic.

Keywords: stochastic orders; hazard rate; odds; convex; star-shaped; exceedance probability

2020 Mathematics Subject Classification: Primary 60E15; Secondary 62G30 62G15

SECTION: 1Introduction

Order statistics are fundamental tools in probability, statistics, and reliability theory. Especially in the context of reliability, a major issue consists of comparing order statistics with different ranks and sample sizes. To be more specific, letbe a random variable (RV) and denote withthe-th order statistic corresponding to an i.i.d. random sample of sizefrom. Ifrepresents the lifetime of some component, thenis the lifetime of a-out-of-system, that is, a system that fails if and only if at leastcomponents stop functioning.
The ageing and reliability properties of such systems, described in terms of their stochastic behaviour, are an important aspect. Hence, the issue of comparing, in some stochastic sense, the order statisticsand, corresponding to systems with a different number of components and different functioning requirements, naturally arises. This problem can be addressed by the theory ofstochastic orders(seeShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)for general results and relationships). In particular, several results on the stochastic comparison between order statistics have been obtained, for example, byArnold and Villaseñor (1991); Arnold and Nagaraja (1991); Kochar (2006); Kochar and Xu (2009); Kochar (2012); Lando et al. (2021).

This paper focuses on establishing conditions under whichdominatesin the sense thatfor every functionin some class. Relationships of this kind are referred to asintegral stochastic orderswith respect to a generator class, as defined byMüller (1997). These orders include comparisons of expected order statistics whencontains the identity function. Significant examples of integral stochastic orders include theincreasing concave(ICV),increasing convex(ICX), and thestar-shaped(SS) orders (seeShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)).
In contrast to numerous methods found in the literatureArnold and Nagaraja (1991); Wilfling (1996); Kundu and Chowdhury (2016), our approach does not assume a known parametric form for the cumulative distribution function (CDF)of the RV.
Instead, we opt for a more flexible approach, by making nonparametric assumptions about. Specifically, we assume that, whereis a carefully chosen cumulative distribution function, andrepresents a set of increasing functions. In other words, we assume thatis related tovia atransform orderLando et al. (2023b), whereis referred to as the generator class.
Interesting examples of distributions satisfying transform order assumptions are theincreasing hazard rate(IHR),increasing hazard rate average(IHRA),increasing odds rate(IOR),decreasing density(DD),decreasing density on average(DDA),decreasing reversed hazard rate(DRHR) families (seeShaked and Shanthikumar (2007); Marshall and Olkin (2007); Lando et al. (2022)).
In this paper, we show that a key step for deriving appealing probabilistic inequalities between order statistics within transform-ordered families involves combining integral and transform orders with the same generator class. Additionally, we illustrate the application of this approach by deriving bounds for expected values of order statistics.
Our method’s general behaviour aligns with expectations: stronger assumptions onlead to more applicable ordering conditions betweenand, or more stringent bounds, and vice versa.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section2, we present formal definitions and outline our general approach. Although our result is of general form, its application extends seamlessly to well-known classes of distributions, discussed in Section4. Section5delves into the derivation of conditions for the ICV and ICX order between order statistics from convex-ordered families, extending some recent results ofLando et al. (2021).
Moving on to Section6, we establish conditions for the SS order between order statistics within star-ordered families. The approach is heuristically extended toincreasing anti-star-shaped(IAS) order, introduced in Section2, based on a simulation algorithm. Finally, Section7provides bounds for the probability thatexceeds its expected order statistic, that is, the probability that a single component surpasses the expected lifetime of the system. As a byproduct of this general result, we provide a new characterisation of the log-logistic distribution (with shape parameter 1).

SECTION: 2Preliminaries and some definitions

Throughout this paper, “increasing” and “decreasing” are taken as “non-decreasing” and “non-increasing”, respectively, and the generalised inverse of an increasing functionis denoted as.
Moreover, the beta function with parametersis denoted with.
Finally, given an absolutely continuous CDF, its density function is denoted by the corresponding lowercase letter.

We shall consider two general families of stochastic orders, characterised either by integration or shape assumptions, which are shown to be crucial for establishing comparisons between expectations of order statistics.

Letbe some family of functions. We say thatdominatesin the-integral stochastic order, denoted as, iffor every, provided that the integrals exist.is referred to as the generator of the integral order.

Setting particular choices for the generator class we obtain some well known stochastic orders. We recall some relevant classes of functions before presenting the translation of the previous definition into specific ordering relations.

A non-negative function, defined forand such that, is said to be

star-shaped at the origin if every segment joining the origin with the graph ofalways stays above the graph, or, equivalently, ifis increasing;

anti-star-shaped (at the origin) if every segment that joins the origin with the graph ofis always below the graph, or, equivalently, ifis decreasing.

We will focus on the following integral stochastic orders, obtained from Definition2.1for particular generator classes.

Assume that. We say thatdominatesin

the usual stochastic order, denoted as, ifis the family of increasing functions;

the increasing concave (ICV) order, denoted as, ifis the family of increasing concave functions;

the increasing convex (ICX) order, denoted as, ifis the family of increasing convex functions;

the star-shaped (SS) order, denoted as, ifis the family of star-shaped functions;

the increasing anti-star-shaped (IAS) order, denoted as, ifis the family of increasing anti-star-shaped functions.

The ICV, ICX, and SS orders are well known (see for instanceShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)). Differently, the IAS order seems not to have been studied.
As we will discuss in Section6.2, the IAS order has the disadvantage, unlike the others, that an easy to check characterization is not available.
The relationships among classes of functions yield the following implications (see Theorem 4.A.55 inShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)for the first line, while the second is proved later in Proposition6.6):

All these orders imply inequality of the means,since the identity function belongs to each of the above classes.

We now introduce a second general family of stochastic orders.

Letbe some family of increasing functions. We say thatdominatesin the-transform order, denoted as, or, equivalently,, if.is referred to as the generator of the transform order.

Similarly to the integral stochastic orders defined earlier, the following transform orders may be obtained from Definition2.4by takingas the class of convex and star-shaped functions, respectively.

Assume that. We say thatdominatesin

the convex transform order, denoted as, ifis the family of (increasing) convex functions;

the star order, denoted as, ifis the family of star-shaped functions.

We should note that the standard stochastic order may be seen both as an integral and a transform order. In fact,if, for every.

In this article, we show that a useful approach to obtaining interesting stochastic inequalities consists in a suitable combination of integral and transform orderings based on a common generator class.

SECTION: 3Main result

We now address the comparison of order statistics with respect to integral stochastic orders. We shall be takingas the CDF of interest, andsome suitably chosen reference CDF. It is well known that the CDF ofis given by, whereis the CDF of a beta random variable with parametersand, that is,(seeJones (2004)).
Equivalently, one can write. This representation renders it difficult to establish conditions for a stochastic comparison between two different order statistics, sayand, since the result depends on the four parametersand on the analytical form of. In a parametric framework,is assumed to be known up to defining several real parameters, so the problem boils down to a mathematical exercise, which may still be analytically complicated.
However, ifis in some nonparametric class, the problem is more complicated, and, as we show in the sequel, it can be solved just by adding some shape constraints on. In this nonparametric framework, results may still be obtained by applying a simple decomposition trick: writeand assume thatis related to some knownby a suitable transform order. Indeed, in this case, the analytical form ofbeing known, the problem reduces to a simpler comparison between known RVs, namelyand.

For the sake of convenience and flexibility in the applications of our main result, we introduce the following notation.

Letbe some CDF andsome family of increasing functions. We define, that is, the family of CDFs that dominatewith respect to the-transform order.

We may now state our main result, which establishes sufficient conditions for comparing expected order statistics.

Letbe a class of increasing functions. If, for some given CDF,,andis preserved undertransformations, then.

Writing, the result follows easily from the definitions above. In fact, the orderis preserved under-transformations, whereas the assumptionensures thatis an-transformation. Therefore, applying the transformationto both sides of the stochastic inequality, we obtain, which implies the desired result by definition of integral stochastic orders, taking into account that.
∎

Note that, ifis closed under the composition of functions, the preservation assumption of theorder is automatically fulfilled. Despite the simplicity of Theorem3.2, its applications are remarkably
interesting, showcasing the profound implications of the interplay between integral and transform orders.

SECTION: 4Types of class generators

Definitions2.1and2.4become particularly interesting when the generator classes are chosen as well-known and popular families. We will now show that some of the already mentioned classes are encompassed within this framework, and add a number of further interesting families of distributions that can also be addressed. Indeed, according to the choice of the classand of the reference CDFin Theorem3.2, these choices yield different families of the type, which, we recall, are defined via a transform order.
As shown below, whenis the class of increasing convex or concave functions,may be characterised using the convex transform order. Hence, we will refer to these choices ofasconvex-orderedfamilies.
Similarly, whenis the class of star-shaped or (increasing) anti-star-shaped functions,may be characterised via the star transform order, so we will refer to these choices asstar-orderedfamilies.
For the sake of simplicity, besides the already defined classesof convex functions, andof functions that are star-shaped at the origin, we shall defineas the class of concave functions, andas the class of increasing anti-star-shaped functions. Bear in mind that a function is convex if and only if its inverse is concave, so thatis equivalent to. The same relation holds between star-shaped and increasing anti-star-shaped functions, namely,is equivalent to. This is stated as follows.

is star-shaped if and only ifis increasing anti-star-shaped.

Letbe star-shaped, sois increasing. Note thatis strictly increasing by construction, but it may have jumps, corresponding to intervals at which the generalised inverseis constant. Proceeding by composition,is increasing, even in those intervals whereis constant. So the ratiois decreasing, concluding the proof.
∎

The results that follow from Theorem3.2depend obviously on the choice of. In particular, we will consider the uniform distribution on the unit interval, with CDF,, the exponential distribution, with CDF,, the standard logistic distribution with CDF,, and the log-logistic distribution with shape parameter equal to 1, hereafter LL1, with CDF,. These reference distributions, as described below, lead to several well-known families of distributions.
We will also consider the corresponding “negative” versions: in general, ifthen, where. Note that, due to symmetry, for the logistic distribution we have.

Combining the classes,,, orwith the choices ofdiscussed above, we may generate several different families of distributions, some of them well known in the literature. An application of Theorem3.2will derive inequalities that hold for each of the constructed classes of distributions. Naturally, some of these are more interesting than others. Hereafter we will focus on the following ones.

The class of concave CDFs, also known asdecreasing density(DD) class, as it requires the existence of a decreasing PDF (except, possibly, at the right-endpoint of its support). This may be obtained by. This class has received much attention in the literature, for instance, it is a typical assumption for shape-constrained statistical inference (see, for example,Groeneboom and Jongbloed (2014)). Among known parametric models, the gamma, the log-logistic, and the Weibull distributions, with shape parameters less than or equal to 1, belong to this class.

The class of convex CDFs, also known asincreasing density(ID) class, as it requires the existence of an increasing PDF (except, possibly, at the right-endpoint of its support). This may be obtained by. This class is generally less applicable than the DD one, as it requires bounded support, and contains few known parametric models.

The class of star-shaped CDFs. In the case of absolutely continuous distributions, this is also known as the class of distribution withincreasing density on average(IDA). This may be obtained as. This class extends the applicability of the ID class.

The class of anti-star-shaped CDFs. In the case of absolutely continuous distributions, this is also known as the class of distribution withdecreasing density on average(DDA), as it requires theto be decreasing. This may be obtained by. This is an interesting class, as it extends the applicability of the popular DD class, allowing for non-monotonicity of the PDF and jumps in the CDF.

The class of distributions with a convexhazard function,, that is, the well-knownincreasing hazard rate(IHR) classMarshall and Olkin (2007), as it requires the existence of an increasing hazard rate function(except, possibly, at the right-endpoint of the support). This may be obtained by. The properties and applicability of IHR models are well known.

The class of distributions with a star-shaped hazard function. This is denoted as theIHR on average(IHRA) class, as it requires, in the absolutely continuous case, to be increasing. This class may be obtained as. This is a relevant class (seeMarshall and Olkin (2007); Shaked and Shanthikumar (2007)) which extends the applicability of the IHR class (in the non-negative case).

The class of distributions with a concave hazard function, that is, thedecreasing hazard rate(DHR) classMarshall and Olkin (2007), as it requires the existence of a decreasing hazard rate function. Analogously, to the previous example, this class may be obtained by.

The class of distributions with an anti-star-shaped hazard function. This is denoted as theDHR on average(DHRA) class, as it requires,
in the absolutely continuous case, to be decreasing. This class may be obtained as. It extends the applicability of the DHR class (in the non-negative case).

The class of CDFs such thatis concave, also characterised bybeing decreasing, known as thedecreasing reversed hazard rate(DRHR) class. This is a rather broad class of distributions. One may obtain this class takingand, the class of functions that dominatew.r.t. the convex transform order.

The class of distributions with a convexodds function,, that is, theincreasing odds rate(IOR) classLando et al. (2022), as it requires the existence of an increasing odds rate function(except, possibly, at the right-endpoint of the support). This may be obtained by. The properties and applicability of IOR models are discussed byLando et al. (2022)andLando et al. (2023a).

The class with a concave odds function may be similarly defined as thedecreasing odds rate(DOR) class, which may be obtained as.

The class of distributions with a convexlog-odds function,, that is, theincreasing log-odds rate(ILOR) classZimmer et al. (1998), as it requires the existence of an increasing log-odds rate function. This may be obtained by.

The class with a concave log-odds function may be similarly defined as thedecreasing log-odds rate(DLOR) class, which may be obtained as.

SECTION: 5Convex-ordered families

In this section, we apply Theorem3.2to families of distributions which may be obtained through the convex transform order, extending some recent results ofLando et al. (2021). All results are summarised in the following corollaries. Although some cases are already proved inLando et al. (2021), we report them here for the sake of completeness.

If, any of the following conditions imply.

is ID and;

is IHR and;

is IOR class and;

is ILOR and.

The flexibility concerning the choice of thefamily in Theorem3.2allows for the following extension. Note that the first 4 cases of this corollary follow trivially from the previous result, and the fact thatif and only if(Theorem 4.A.1 inShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)).

If, any of the following conditions imply.

is DD class and;

is DHR and;

is DOR class and;

is DLOR and;

Ifis DRHR and;

is DROR and.

Note that ifis increasing concave, thenis increasing convex, and that the ICX order is obviously preserved under increasing convex transformations.
As follows from Theorem 4.A.63 inShaked and Shanthikumar (2007)(remark that the ICX order is, inShaked and Shanthikumar (2007), referred as 2-icx) in conjunction with Lemma 2.6 inLando et al. (2021), a sufficient condition foris thatand.
Then, settingas the uniform, unit exponential, LL1, standard logistic, negative exponential, and negative LL1, we obtain conditions 1–6, respectively.
We verify only case 5., the less obvious one, corresponding to, where we need to compute

using repeatedly (6.44) inViola (2016), where,, whererepresents the Euler gamma function, is thedigammafunction (we refer the reader toViola (2016), for properties of).
∎

Note that, since both the ICV and the ICX orders imply the inequality between the means, Corollaries5.1and5.2provide assumptions implying that. Furthermore, we may derive conditions for the comparison with the mean of their parent distribution by settingor, respectively.

SECTION: 6Star-ordered families

In this section we deal with families of distribution of the form, which include the family of anti-star-shaped CDFs and the DHRA family, using the SS order. Then, we move to families of the form, which include the family of star-shaped distributions and the IHRA family, using the new IAS order.

SECTION: 6.1SS order of order statistics

Let us start with some preliminary discussion. As starshapedness refers only to functions with domain, in this section, we will consider only non-negative RVs. First, a simple preservation property.

if and only if, for every star-shaped function.

It is also useful to remark that a functionis star-shaped if and only if its generalized inverseis increasing anti-star-shaped, as proved in Lemma4.1. We now recall the following characterization of the SS order.

if and only if, for every,

In the following subsections, we will frequently deal with transformations of beta RVs using the result stated next. The proof is omitted since it follows straightforwardly, requiring a simple observation of the shape of the graphical representation of the function considered in each case.

Let, where,, definethe set of roots of the equationthat are in, and represent byits cardinality. Then (i) if,; (ii) if,; (iii) if,.

The previous lemma means that when,has at most two elements.

Using the above lemmas, it is not difficult to apply Theorem3.2to wide families of distributions, as discussed in the next subsections.

The next theorem deals with the case of anti-star-shaped CDFs, denoted as DDA distributions.

Assume thatis anti-star-shaped.
Denote by

Ifand for every, it holds that, then.

Sinceis star-shaped, the result holds by Theorem3.2and Lemma6.1, provided that, which, taking into account Theorem6.2and the distribution of the beta order statistics mentioned before (andJones (2004)), is equivalent to

It is easily seen that (2) is equivalent to, for every. Now, the extreme points ofare at 0, 1, or among the solutions of, hence the result follows immediately from the assumptions.
∎

The results of Theorem6.4can be compared with part 1. of Corollary5.2. Assume thator, equivalently, that. Ifis concave (DD class), thenfor. Ifis increasing anti-star-shaped (yielding the wider DDA class), then the stronger orderholds ifforin the described set. Recall that the ICX order is necessary for the SS order, andis necessary for the ICX order. So, the condition, forin the set defined in Theorem6.4, is stronger than just.

We may use Theorem6.4to get a complete geometric description of the-comparability of order statistics when F is DDA.
Assume the sample sizesare given. Based on Theorem 1 inArab et al. (2021)we know that, which implies, wheneverand, that is, whenever.
Likewise, this result also implies that, implying, wheneverand, which is equivalent to(see Figure1). For the regionwe have no-comparability.
The linecorresponds to points such that, whereis given by (1). Above this line we havehence, according to Theorem6.2, there is no-comparability. Finally, we are left with the region whereand, the region not shaded in Figure1, where actual verification of (2) is needed.

Forin the unshaded region it is easily seen thatwheneveris close to 0 or 1. Moreover, as Lemma6.3implies thathas two extreme points in, the monotonicity ofis “”.
A numerical verification shows that the initial interval whereis decreasing is rather small, sowill remain nonnegative wheneveris large enough. Therefore, we expect that pointsnot satisfying the assumption in Theorem6.4will be close to the top border of the unshaded region. A few examples illustrating this behaviour are shown in Figure2.

We now extend our approach to the family of DHRA distributions.

Assume thatis DHRA. Let

Ifandfor everythen.

Sinceis star-shaped, the result holds by Theorem3.2and Lemma6.1, provided that, or, equivalently,. This may be expressed as

Using the binomial Theorem, we obtain

and similarly for the second term, hence (4) is equivalent to, for every. Note that, due to the exponential terms. Now, the functionis continuous on, so it is nonnegative if and only if
its minimal value inis nonnegative.
The extreme points ofare easily seen to be among the solutions of, hence the result follows immediately from the assumptionfor every.
∎

A complete geometric picture of the-comparability for DHRA distributions produces a plot similar to the one in Figure1. The shaded regions where one has comparability are the same, but the directions of the-comparability are reversed, taking into account thatandstill havedistributions with the parameters swapped.
Moreover, the red line in Figure1is now replaced by setting to 0 the two terms appearing in part 2. of Corollary5.2, that is, for eachgoing through the coordinatesandsuch thatandhave opposite signs.
The region below this curve, corresponding to, and above the diagonal is seen to be where we have no-comparability. The remaining region needs numerical verification. Hence, with respect to Figure1, one reverses the direction of the comparisons, swaps the unshaded and shaded areas between the two straight lines, and, the separating red line is no longer straight.

SECTION: 6.2Properties of the IAS order

Our method can be applied to classes of the formusing the IAS order. This includes the important IHRA class, obtained for, and also the IDA class, where we take, the uniform distribution.
In some sense the IAS order behaves like the SS order, with the disadvantage that it does not seem to have a simple characterization based on a transformation of the CDFs, analogous to Theorem6.2, which makes it difficult to check.

The IAS order satisfies the following properties.

Letandbe nonnegative random variables with CDFsand, respectively.

.

implies, for every increasing anti-star-shaped.

Letbe a random variable, and letandbe the conditional CDFs ofandwith respect to the event. Iffor every possible realizationof, then.

The first implication follows from the fact that all increasing anti star-shaped functions are increasing. Letbe an increasing concave function. Ifis also anti-star-shaped andimplies that. If, define, which is still increasing concave, and proceed similarly.

Letbe any increasing anti-star-shaped function. Taking into account thatis increasing, the quotient

is the product of two decreasing functions, hence it is decreasing itself. That is,is increasing anti-star-shaped. Therefore,implies thator, equivalently,.

This follows directly from the tower law of conditional expectations.

∎

Properties 2. and 3. mean that the IAS order is closed under composition and mixtures, respectively. Property 1. shows why the IAS order can be useful. In fact, it measures size and dispersion at the same time. The IAS order implies the inequality of the means, moreover, if, thenimplies that. Below, we provide examples showing that neither of the implications in part 1. of Proposition6.6is an equivalence. The above properties suggests that the IAS order can be used as a valid (and stronger) alternative to the commonly-used ICV order, whenever we deal with star-ordered families. However, for technical reasons, the verification of the IAS order is complicated, as discussed in the next subsection.

Let,, andbe given, and consider the random variablesandwith distributions, and. As, the CDFs ofandcross, then. However, given any increasing anti-star-shaped function, so thatandis decreasing, we have. Hence, showing that the first implication in part 1. of Proposition6.6is indeed not an equivalence.

To show that also the second implication is not an equivalence, takeexponentially distributed, with CDF, andwith Weibull distribution, with shape and scale parameters equal to 2 and, respectively. Therefore,and their CDFs cross once. According to Theorem 4.A.22 inShaked and Shanthikumar (2007),. On the other hand, considering the increasing anti-star-shaped function

it is easy to verify that, so.

SECTION: 6.3IAS order of order statistics: a heuristic approach

From a practical point of view, a simple characterization of the IAS order, described in distributions terms, seems unavailable and remains an open problem. An alternative approach may be based on Theorem6.9below. To state our result, we need some additional notations. Givendefine

Moreover, given sequencesand, define

Letandbe absolutely continuous nonnegative random variables with density functionsand, respectively.if and only if, for every positive integer, and for everyand, and everydefined according to (6), we have:

As proved in Lemma4.1,is increasing anti-star-shaped if and only if, whereis star-shaped. By the change of variable,, and equivalently for the integration with respect to. Hence, we need to prove thatfor every star-shaped function. Now, every star-shaped functioncan be approximated by a sequence, where the sequencesandsatisfy the given assumptions. Indeed, this follows directly from approximating the increasing functionby an increasing step-function.
Therefore, by monotonous approximation,if and only iffor every integer, and everyandas given. Asandhave discontinuities at, andandhave densitiesand, respectively, we obtain

and similarly for.
∎

Although Theorem6.9provides a necessary and sufficient condition, it requires the verification of infinitely many inequalities, thus reducing its usability for a direct verification of the IAS order. To address this difficulty we propose the following simulation algorithm to check if. Letbe the total number of repetitions; for every:

randomly generate, say, from a discrete distribution with infinite support;

randomly generate the sequencesandand defineaccording to (6);

compute

and

ifwe have that, otherwise, ifwe have an indication thatmay dominatein the IAS order.

The procedure described above can be used to check whether.

Assume that. If for every positive integer, and for every choice ofand,

then.

According to Theorem6.9, (8) is equivalent to. Then, the result follows from the fact thatis increasing anti-star-shaped and this class is closed under composition, noting that, as we are integrating with respect to a beta distribution, we only need to consider the approximation in [0,1].
∎

Similarly to the previous applications, choosing a particularleads to conditions for, whenbelongs to the appropriate family of distributions. For example, takingwe find conditions that apply whenis star-shaped (or in the IDA class, referring to the families described in Section4), while the choicegives conditions whenis IHRA.

Take,,,. In this case we havewhich means that. Hence, as the strongest of the stochastic order fails to hold, we may be interested in checking that some weaker order, such as ICV or IAS, holds. Ifis convex, these values satisfyand, then.
However, ifis not convex but only star-shaped, we can check the condition of Corollary6.10for, using the proposed algorithm. Takingand random generatingfrom a Poisson distribution with parameter, we obtain, suggesting, although not actually proving, that. This would imply that, although, as the identity is an increasing anti-star-shaped function. Note thatmeans thatfor every increasing concave function, a large subset of the class of increasing anti-star-shaped functions. Nevertheless, the proposed algorithm was not able to identify an increasing anti-star-shaped function violating (8). Although this, of course, it is not guaranteed that such a function does not exist.
Now, take,,,. Even in this case,. Ifis convex we still have. However, applying again our algorithm (with the same settings), we obtain, so in this case we know that. Accordingly, one cannot conclude thatdominatesin the IAS order, although we assume thatis star-shaped. Similar examples can be provided for the IHRA case.

SECTION: 7Bounds for probabilities of exceedance

Consider a scenario where we represent the lifetime of a-out-of-system as. A notable challenge in reliability analysis involves determining the probability that the individual component’s lifetime falls below or exceeds the expected lifetime of the entire system, denoted as. In a parametric setting, this probability can be precisely computed using the mathematical formula of the parent CDF. However, when the exact form ofis unknown, we can leverage information about its overall shape to establish upper or lower bounds for this probability. This would follow from the application of Jensen’s inequality, under the assumption thatbelongs to a convex-ordered familyor. We remark that the case in whichis the uniform has been already discussed byAli and Chan (1965).

Given a CDF, define. For everyandsuch thatis defined, the following holds.

LetThen,.

LetThen,.

In particular, given a pair of CDFsand, if, then.

We prove just case 1., as case 2. is dealt similarly. We are assuming thatis concave, henceis convex. Therefore, Jensen’s inequality gives.
Now, taking into account thatapplyingto both sides we obtain.
Note thatimplies that, so that, hence the last statement follows.
∎

Put otherwise, the above result means that, if, the expected order statisticis always smaller than or equal to the-quantile of. Similarly, if, the expected order statisticis always greater than or equal to the-quantile of, that is,. This result also enables a useful characterization of the LL1 distribution. Indeed, generally one may approximatewith: forand(constant),. This result is exact forfinite if and only ifhas an LL1 distribution.

if and only if, for any scale parameter.

First, note that, for the LL1 distribution, the expectationsare finite for everywhile.belongs to bothandif and only if. Without loss of generality, let. In this case, it is easy to verify that, so. This means that the-quantile of the LL1 is.
∎

Common choices ofyield the following explicit expressions of:

If.

If,.

If,.

If,.

Table1shows thebounds forand some choices of.
The application of our results is quite straightforward. For instance, if we know that the CDF of interest,, is IHR and has a decreasing density, as is the case, for example, of the Gompertz distributions (for suitably chosen parameters), then the probability of havingis always betweenand, that is,

Ifand, this means that.
Similarly, ifis IOR and DRHR, then

As these classes are wider than the previously considered, these bounds are generally weaker, so, forand, we now find.

The bounds, with respect to the families of distributions, are sharp, as illustrated in Figure3, where we plotted true probabilities for two distributions that are both IRH and DRHR (Weibull with shape parameter larger than 1, and power distribution), and the inverted power distribution with exponent, which is not IHR, hence violates the lower bound.

SECTION: 7.1Application

The paperNichols and Padgett (2006)provides a table containing a sample of sizeof breaking stress for carbon fibers. Applying the tests ofLando (2023)andLando et al. (2023a), respectively, it can be tested that this dataset is likely to come from an IOR distribution. Moreover, the dataset also seems to satisfy the DRHR assumption.
A straightforward interval foris then obtained by plugging in the appropriate bounds described above to the empirical CDF, that is. Taking, as an example,, this interval reduces to a single point, as we get. However, we may use instead estimators that take into account the available information about the shape of the distribution: we may use, introduced byLando et al. (2023a), as an IOR estimator of the CDF, and, proposed bySengupta and Paul (2005), as a DRHR estimator. Differently from the empirical CDF, these estimators are continuous. Hence, an interval formay be given by. For this sample, thus taking into account the knowledge about the shape of the CDF, this leads to.

SECTION: Funding

T.L. was supported by the Italian funds ex MURST 60% 2022. I.A. and P.E.O. were partially supported by the Centre for Mathematics of the University of Coimbra UID/MAT/00324/2020, funded by the Portuguese Government through FCT/MCTES and co-funded by the European Regional Development Fund through the Partnership Agreement PT2020.

SECTION: References