SECTION: Introduction
It has long been establishedthat certain 4D gravitational theories
at the two-derivative level, describing the coupling of Maxwell fields and neutral scalar fields to gravity in the absence of a cosmological constant or, more generally, a potential for the scalar fields,
when dimensionally reduced to two dimensions,
yield 2D non-linear sigma-models coupled to gravity, whose equations of motion are classically integrable, i.e. that can be viewed as compatibility equations of a linear system.
This has recently been the subject of revived interest.
The dimensional reduction is performed by means of a two-step procedure. In the first step one reduces over an isometry direction down to three dimensions, and then Hodge dualises all Maxwell field strengths into neutral scalar fields.
We will only consider the reduction of 4D gravitational theories satisfying the condition that
the resulting target space for the enlarged set of neutral scalar fields is a symmetric space. A further reduction along a second commuting isometry direction results in a 2D gravitational model whose field equations are the compatibility equations for a linear system. The latter, introduced by Belinski-Zakharov, has an equivalent description given by
Breitenlohner-Maison, as shown in.
In this paper we will work with the Breitenlohner-Maison (BM) linear system.

The addition of a cosmological constant or a potential for the neutral scalar fields to these four-dimensional gravitational theories will, in general, not preserve the integrable nature of the dimensionally reduced equations of motion. Aspects of this were discussed in. In this paper we show that in the presence of a scalar potential,
for a certain solution subspace defined by (), a
subset of the equations of motion in two dimensions can still be viewed as being the compatibility conditions of a linear system.
We further show that this linear system admits a Lax pair description in terms of differential operators, and reduces to the BM system when the scalar potential vanishes.
Hence, this linear system framework for studying integrability only applies to solutions that continue to exist in the absence of a scalar potential.

Further, these solutions admit a complementary 1D description, thereby enabling us to independently study
Liouville integrability in 1D expressed in
terms of Lax pair matrices.
Here, we use analytic and machine learning (ML) techniques to search for Lax pair matrices as well as conserved currents in the 1D setup. ML techniques have been previously implemented in the search for Lax pairs in. Here we will adopt a different strategy by framing the Lax pair search as a search for conserved currents. This approach lends itself easily to interpretable results as we show that it admits a symbolic regression implementation.

Our results can be summarized as follows. For a subclass of 4D gravitational backgrounds we show that in the presence of a potential for the neutral scalar fields, a subset of the 2D
equations of motion can be viewed as compatibility equations for a linear system that reduces to the BM linear system when the potential vanishes.

This subclass of 4D gravitational solutions admits a 1D description. This enables us to explore the integrability properties of this subclass in the framework of 1D Liouville integrability.

Liouville integrability for a model with a phase space of dimensiondemandsindependent Poisson commuting conserved currents. These are first integrals of motion, differentiable functions of phase space variables that are constant on each on-shell trajectory in the solution subspace under consideration and do not take the same value on all such trajectories. One way of encoding such a set of conserved currents is via a pair of Lax matricesandsatisfying the Lax equation

with both matrices being non-zero matrix valued functions of phase space variables. In this approach, the existence of these matrices constitutes a necessary but not sufficient condition for Liouville integrability. Sufficiency is achieved by extracting the required number of independent Poisson commuting conserved currents from the Lax pair.

A given integrable 1D theory lends itself to multiple Lax pair writings of different dimensions, and in order to systematise and simplify our search for these pairs and the consequent identification of conserved currents, we define a ‘canonical’ frame for them whereis a unit matrix of dimension, whileis a diagonalmatrix with each of the diagonal entries being a conserved function of phase space variables. As we restrict ourself to time-independent models, we can and therefore do choose one of the diagonal elements to be the Hamiltonian. Liouville integrability is then equivalent to the existence of such a Lax matrix where the diagonal elements are linearly independent and Poisson commute with each other. We mount a search for Lax pairs, both canonical and generic, using both analytic and ML techniques. Our findings include ML driven searches for numerical Lax pairs, analytic results for the Lax pairs and analytic and ML symbolic regression construction of conserved currents.
The 2D linear system and 1D Liouville integrability approaches make up two complementary and distinct original treatments for this problem.

This paper is organised as follows. In Sectionwe write down 2D
non-linear sigma models and the equations of motion resulting from the dimensional reduction of specific 4D gravity theories. We identify a specific subclass of solutions amenable to a modified BM linear system.
In Sectionwe write down the modified BM linear system as well as Lax pair descriptions in terms of differential operators for the chosen solution subclass, and we give two illustrative examples. In Sectionwe discuss the Liouville integrability of the systems from a 1D point of view. In Sectionwe construct analytic Lax pairs in two models. In Sectionwe set up an ML strategy to determine numerical Lax pairs for the 1D systems studied above. In Sectionwe present
interpretable as well as numerical ML results
for
conserved currents in these models.
Finally in Sectionwe conclude with comments on our findings and comparisons with other ML approaches. In Appendixwe discuss the derivation of the field equations
in two dimensions.
In Appendixwe present families of Lax pair matrices for certain 1D systems. Appendixcontains further details about our ML experiments.

SECTION: Dimensional reduction and field equations in two dimensions
We consider a Lagrangian in four space-time dimensions describing the coupling of Maxwell fields and neutral scalar fieldsto gravity.
We allow for the presence of a potentialfor the neutral scalar fields.
We then assume that we can dimensionally reduce this theory down to two dimensions using a well-known 2-step procedure. Here we follow.

In the first step,
we reduce to three dimensions over an isometry direction(which is time-like whenand
space-like when),

The metric factorsandare taken to be independent of.
In three space-time dimensions, we Hodge dualise the Maxwell field strengths into scalar fields.
We will only consider the reduction of 4D gravitational theories satisfying the condition that
the resulting target space for the enlarged set of neutral scalar fields is a symmetric space.
The resulting
three-dimensional Lagrangian then describes the coupling of these fields
to three-dimensional gravity, in the presence
of a potential. It takes the form

where the enlarged set of neutral scalar fields is encoded in a matrix. Heredenotes a matrix 1-form. The symmetric spaceis endowed with an involutive Lie algebra automorphism,
which is used to decompose the Lie algebra ofinto the direct sum. Then,is identified withand
satisfies.

In the second step,
we further reduce the model over a second commuting isometry directionusing

In the above we take.
We denote the space-time coordinates in two dimensions by, which we take to satisfy.
The fieldsare functions ofonly.
Takingto be a flat metric given by

and combining () with () results in a four-dimensional line element given by

The resulting two-dimensional Lagrangian takes the form given in, augmented by the presence of a potential

namely

where

Note thatdepends linearly on. The potentialdepends on the fields, but only the fields(and also, which is defined below in ()) are encoded in the matrix.

We introduce the Hodge star operatorin two dimensions, satisfying

Using, the fieldis defined in terms of the fieldin () by

The equations of motion that follow from the two-dimensional Lagrangian () can be obtained using standard techniques. We present the details of their derivation in Appendix, for the benefit of the readers.
We now summarise the outcome of this analysis.
The independent field equations are

where the combinationis given by (),
and

SECTION: Subspace of solutions
In the following
we will focus on solutions to the field equations that have the following dependence on,

In the abovedenote the scalar fields encoded in, which include, whererefers to the set of scalar fields in four dimensions.
This implies

Then, the field equation () becomes

withgiven by (). Note thatis a function ofonly.
Furthermore, we assume that

Then, the first equation in () becomes

while the second and third equations become

Combining () with () and () gives

which is solved by

The fourth equation in () becomes

When, this does not impose any further condition on (). On the other hand, when, we conclude that

where we have adjusted the integration constant so as to ensure compatibility with (). Thus,is determined
by (), withwhen.

Summarizing,
the field equations forand for the scalar fields encoded inare (), () and (), withdetermined in terms ofby ().

When, the field equation () is solved by

wheredenotes a constant matrix. Whenwe have, and () becomes

Writing the general solution of () as a linear combination
of two linearly independent basis vectorsandthat
satisfy,

we find that () imposes the following condition on the constant matrix,

On the other hand, when,
() becomes

Writing the general solution of () as

we obtain the following condition on the constant matrix,

In the next section we will introduce a linear system in two dimensions whose solvability condition is the field equation ().
To do so, we will writeas a sum of two terms,, where

We then introduce the fieldby

We assume thathas the form

The spectral parameter entering the linear system will be defined in terms of.

SECTION: Integrability in two dimensions
We now turn to the question of integrability of the field equations in two dimensions.
In the absence of a potential, it is well known that the field equations forandconstitute the compatibility conditions for the Breitenlohner-Maison linear system.
In the presence of a potential, no such linear system has been written down.
In the following section, we write down a linear system
for the subspace of solutions discussed in Section, such that the corresponding field equation () foris the compatibility
condition for this linear system, as we show below.

We proceed by first reviewing the Breitenlohner-Maison (BM) linear system forin the language of Lax pairsgeneralising the discussion given there. We then proceed to construct the linear system for.

SECTION: : A Lax pair for the BM linear system
In the absence of a potential, the field equations forandare given by (cf. () and ())

It is well known that these field equations are the compatibility conditions for an auxiliary system of first-order differential equations,
called Breitenlohner-Maison linear system. This linear system (a Lax pair) takes the form

whereis a matrix function, and
whereis a function taken from the set of functionsof the form

withdefined as in (). Note that

as well as

and hence

The linear system ()
can be expressed in terms of a pair of differential operators,

where

with

For the case whenis identified with the coordinate, it was shown inthat the compatibility conditionimplies the field equations (). Here we generalise the discussion given into the case whenis a function of.
We compute the compatibility condition,

where we usedonce. Next, using () as well as (), we establish

Inserting this into () gives

Next, using bothandwe infer the relation

and hence the first line in () cancels out, so that

Assuming that the matrixis invertible, we obtain

which, together with (), are the field equations (). Finally,is determined by integrating the last two equations of (). Their solvability is a consequence of the first two equations in ().

When, the field equations forandare modified, and in general these modified field equations will no longer be the compatibility conditions for a linear system. Below we will show that when restricting to the subspace of solutions discussed in Section, one can write down a linear system whose
compatibility
condition is the modified field equation () for.
Since the field equation forseizes to be of the form given in (), this linear system cannot be formulated in terms of, but instead
will have to be formulated in terms of a pairthat satisfies ().
The field equation forgiven in ()
will therefore not arise as a
compatibility condition for the linear system and will
have to be imposed separately. Likewise, () will also have to be verified separately, where we recall thatis given by ().

SECTION: : A Lax pair
We focus on the solution space described in Section, in which case, and we consider the following modification of
the Lax pair () which is induced by a non-vanishing,

whereis a function taken from the set of functions () withreplaced by, and wherehas the form given in ().
Here,describes the modification of the Lax pair () due to the presence of.

We imposeand study the
compatibility condition

We obtain

Usingwe obtain

Next, using () as well as ()
withreplaced by,
we establish

Inserting this into () gives

Next, using bothandwe obtain

and hence we get

Assuming that the matrixis invertible, we infer

whereis a constant matrix.

Demanding that whenthe modified Lax pair reduces to the original Lax pair (), implies thatwhen switching off
the potential. We assume that the solution forin the presence ofreduces to the one when,
and that likewisereduces to. It follows that when,takes the form

Then, the modificationcan be expressed as

To relateto the potential, we
return to the field equation forgiven in (),
which we write as

Both sides of this equation only depend on. Integrating overgives

where we have adjusted the integration constant so as to obtainwhen.
Then,can be expressed as

We note that the modified Lax pair () can also be rewritten as

At this state it is important to point out that we write the modified Lax pair only for configurations for which we can define alimit, as we show in the examples below.

SECTION: Examples
When dimensionally reducing General Relativity to two dimensions using the 2-step procedure mentioned above, the resulting cosetis. The matrixis given by

whereis the metric factor in (), andis related to the metric factorby ().

In the presence of a cosmological constant,takes the form

We now discuss two illustrative examples that arise in General Relativity in four dimensions in the presence of a cosmological constant,
namely
the-Schwarzschild solution and thesolution.

We consider the-Schwarzschild solution in General Relativity in the presence of a cosmological constant. In spherical coordinates, its line element reads

with

Denoting the real zero ofby, we restrict toto ensure that.
The line element can be brought to the form () (with)
by the coordinate transformation

which satisfies.
We refrain from giving the explicit expression for, which involves an elliptic integral of the first kind. The quantitiesandare given by

with

Then

Let us consider the case when. When switching off the
cosmological constant (by sending), we obtain from (),

where the constantis given by

Note that, since.
Inserting this into () results in

Note thatis of the form () with

Using () in () results in

Hence,
the modificationgiven in
(), when evaluated on the solution, reads

In order to recoverspace-time we sendto zero. In this limitshrinks to zero since. We now proceed to analyse thesolution.

Now let us setin (), in which case the line element () describes
anspace-time in global coordinates. We restrict to the patch.
From () we obtain

where we have adjusted the integration constant so as to ensure that.
Using (), we obtain

withdetermined from ().
Then, in the limitwe have, and we obtain

as well as. Hence, the modificationgiven in
(), when evaluated on the solution, reads

SECTION: Reduction to one dimension
The systems considered in Sectionsandare effectively one-dimensional, as all relevant quantities depend only on the coordinate, with the exception of the metric factor(which may have an extra dependence onthrough, see ()).
These arise from a reduction to one dimension of the following four-dimensional Lagrangian,

corresponding to an Einstein-Maxwell theory withscalar fields.
We take the target space metricto be constant and the four-dimensional metric to be of the form

with

We have adjusted the parameterto make it coincide with the definition given in (). The field equations read,

with the last one being the Hamiltonian constraint. The previous equations are written in terms ofand an electric-magnetic potential which is given by

whereandare the electric and magnetic charges carried by,

A quick comparison of the line element () with
the line element () (where we takeand usewithand),

gives

The subsequent coordinate transformationbrings the line element () into the form ().
Equations () - () are consistent with (), () and (), as follows. Recall that the equation for the field(eq. ()) supplies the equations of motion for the warp factoras well as for the scalar fields. Hence, () must come from the field equation for. Similarly theequation (eq. ()) corresponds to (). The equation of motion
for(which is part of ()) can be obtained from a combination of (), () and (). The consistency equation () coincides with
the Hamiltonian constraint ().
In what follows,
we set

Then, inserting the line element () and the expression for the field strength () into the Lagrangian ()
results in the following effective one-dimensional action,

The total derivative term is irrelevant in constructing the equations of motion and ensuing dynamics, and we will ignore it henceforth.
The 4D field equations can be derived from this effective 1D action as follows. Choosing the 1D field degrees of freedom to be,and, we see that the equations () and () are obtained by the Euler-Lagrange variation of the action w.r.tandrespectively. Given that the 1D Lagrangian does not explicitly depend on ‘time’, its Hamiltonianis constant on-shell. Hence the fourth 4D field equation () is recognizable as the Hamiltonian constraint. The first field equationis obtained by substituting this constraint into the expression obtained by the Euler-Lagrange variation w.r.t.
Thus we can regard the solution space of the 1D action as being generated by field configurations satisfying (), () and (), which we will refer to as the equations of motion (EOMs).
Consequently, using a relabeling of the field degreesand, we rewrite the bulk 1D action which generates the EOMs
when supplemented by the Hamiltonian constancyas

In (), we have dropped the constantas it does not affect any of the equations of motion.

For the purpose of studying 1D systems represented by actions of the form above, we do not impose the Hamiltonian constraint necessary for embedding the 4D solution space in the 1D solution space. Instead, given that the 1D action is expressed by a time-independent Lagrangian, the Hamiltonian on an on-shell trajectory is a constant of motion, equal to say:

This leaves () and () unchanged, but modifies () to

The Hamiltonian constraintis simply enforced byto recover ().

A classical system represented by () is defined to be Liouville integrable if one can identifyindependentcommuting first integrals of motion(i.e. conserved currents possessing vanishing Poisson brackets with each other) on its phase space, whereis the dimension of the configuration space. One of the strategies for identifying these integrals is to write down a Lax pair with matricesandwhich satisfy

when evaluated on-shell, and then extractindependent integrals fromwhich have to be shown to be in involution, i.e. Poisson commute with each other. Hence, the existence of a Lax pair is only a necessary condition for integrability. For the remainder of the text, we will often work with a specific ‘canonical’ construction of the Lax pair based on the following argument:
if we can identifyindependent commuting integrals,, one of which is the
Hamiltonian,
one can readily write down anmatrix Lax pair

which clearly satisfies the Lax condition ().
Hence, the existence of this canonical Lax pair is both a necessary and sufficient condition to infer the integrability of the system.

In the absence of a potential,, we see that the EOM (),

simply eliminatesin terms ofas

whereandare the constants of integration of the EOM. The constantcan be eliminated by choosing the origin of the radial coordinate, which is a gauge choice leaving us with the conserved chargecharacterising on-shell orbits in phase space. Hence,is completely determined in terms ofand, and the remaining degrees of freedom correspond to the.
Now each scalar degree of freedomcan be associated with a constant of motion,

whereis the momentum associated with the scalar degree of freedom.
This is evident from
the EOM () guaranteeing, and further, it is easy to observe that the Poisson bracket vanishes,, thus
verifying that these canonical momenta constitute a set of independent commuting conserved functions of phase space variables. These functions can only be shown to be first integrals of motion iff we can demonstrate that they take a finite on-shell value and do not take the same value for all solutions in thesubclass. In order to make this argument, we recall that each such solution, representing a 4D gravitational configuration, is associated with a fixed asymptotic limit for its fields
as. We evaluateto establish its finiteness in order to determine its viability as a first integral. As an illustrative example, for, one possible set of 4D asymptotic conditions corresponds to flat Minkowski space-time which translates to the asymptotic limits, while. Using, we see that

Therefore, in this caseassumes an independent finite on-shell value. This check for finiteness must be passed on every solution in theclass to establish it as a first integral of motion. Note that our restriction of the 1D solution space to a subspace upliftable to 4D implies, which lowers the number of independent degrees of freedom by one. Hence, given a successful finiteness check,and theconstitute a set of independent commuting integrals of motion, whose cardinality is equal to the number of degrees of freedom, which verifies the integrability of the system.

A similar argument holds in the case, where one can write down a set of constants of motion as

However, in this case, the EOM

is not trivially solvable in contrast to thecase and may not necessarily yield a conserved
charge.
Hence, the degrees of freedom are genericallyand the scalar fields.
In this case, we have a variety of possible asymptotic fall-offs which may result in thebeing divergent asymptotically, in which case we need to extract regularised values for them, if they are to be counted as first integrals. As an example, say we consider fall-offs defined byand.
Hence, we can evaluate theto be

Forthevalues diverge asymptoticallyand we regularise these values by peeling of the divergentpower to obtain

As in the, the finiteness check over each solution determines whether thequalify as independent integrals of motion, which Poisson commute with each other.

Here again, as in the vanishingcase, restricting to the subspace of the 1D solution space that is upliftable to the solution space of the parent 4D Lagrangian, requires us to impose the null Hamiltonian constraint (), which reduces the number of degrees of freedom by one. Hence the cardinality of the set of integrals constituted of the(if they qualify as first integrals) is one less than the number of the degrees of freedom. The latter is the required number of integrals of motion for establishing Liouville integrability. The presence of an extra integral of motion has to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
Below, we will illustrate our conclusions above with specific 1D examples
by using both analytic and
machine learning (ML) techniques to construct explicit Lax pairs and conserved currents for these systems.

SECTION: Lax pairs for 1D systems
In the following, we consider systems described by the one-dimensional action ().
For the remainder of our discussion we will focus only on the bulk term, as the total derivative boundary term does not affect system dynamics. For the same reason, we will also drop the term proportional to.
For simplicity, we restrict the discussion to the case of one Maxwell field
sourced by an electric chargeonly, in which case.
We then consider specific choices of the couplingand of the potential, and we
construct Lax pair matricesfor these systems. Systems described by the one-dimensional action () withwere considered in the context of Nernst branes in.

Note that a system may possess a description in terms of several Lax pairs.
In Appendixwe exhibit two families of Lax pairs for 1D systems described by a Hamiltonian of the form.

SECTION: No scalar field
Let us first consider the case when there is no scalar field present in () or equivalently, ().
The 1D action in this case represents 2 degrees of freedom. The Hamiltonianin this case is clearly independent of, renderingto be a constant of motion. Hence, we have two mutually commuting independent conserved currents,and, corresponding to the 2 degrees of freedom, thus verifying Liouville integrability. Alternatively, if we restrict to solutions that are upliftable to 4D gravitational configurations, we must fix. This reduces the number of degrees of freedom to one and, being conserved, is enough to guarantee integrability. We will illustrate this in the example below.

Here, we choose the couplingand the potentialin () to be constant.
Settingand,
we obtain

This system, which depends on the two parameters, admits a Lax pairthat satisfies () when evaluated on-shell. Note that themodel admits a solution that can be lifted up to the-Schwarzschild solution discussed in Section, after imposing () withand.

Setting, the action () becomes

with the Hamiltonian being

A canonical Lax pair for this system is given in terms of the integrals of motionandas

An alternative Lax pair is given bymatrices of the form

with

wheresatisfies.

Note that the action in this case has a translation symmetry,, whereis an arbitrary constant. This implies that the 2 conserved currents making up the canonical Lax pair define each on-shell trajectory uniquely modulo this symmetry. For the family ofSchwarschild black holes withrepresenting the mass, for whichandand hence, the translation symmetry ingenerates all such black hole solutions from a puresolution corresponding to. Hence, the mass information is not present in the value of. In the presence of scalars, the action () does not admit this translation symmetry and hence, the constantin () which plays the role of the mass cannot be eliminated by symmetry and therefore is a constant of motion that characterises orbits.

SECTION: One scalar field
Next, let us consider the case when there is one scalar fieldpresent in (), with the couplingand the potentialgiven by

wheredenote constants. This choice ofandis the one that occurs in the model based ondiscussed in. The resulting 1D action reads

Labelling

we can rewrite the action as

This system depends on the 3 parameters.
The canonical momenta are given by

The Hamiltonian, which is conserved on-shell, takes the form

Hamilton’s equation yield

Using (), one readily verifies that the following combination is a on-shell conserved quantity,

The value ofis then given by

Noticing thatrepresents metric factors in the four-dimensional line element (),
we immediately see that the regularised value ofwill be determined purely by the asymptotic metric behaviour and fall-off, and varies for solutions with different asymptotia in the. Consequently, it qualifies as an integral of motion for all such solutions. It does not, however, commute with the
currentgiven in ().
In terms of the fields in (),is expressed as

We have not been able to construct an additional independent conserved current that Poisson commutes withorand hence cannot verify the Liouville integrability of the system in the general case when the parametersare all non-vanishing.

In the specific case when, it is easily seen from () that the momentumbecomes a
constant of motion. Moreover,. If for each solution in theclass,andtake finite on-shell values (possibly after appropriate regularisation) which are not constant all over thesolution class, they qualify as conserved currents. From (), we see that the difference between their values depends purely on the metric fall-offs and generically they are independent.
Therefore, given successful finiteness checks for theandover the entireclass, we have three independent commuting integrals of motion, verifying Liouville integrability.

This analytic construction of currents is in accord with our machine learning experiments to which we turn in the next section.

SECTION: Machine learning integrability
In this section we use machine learning (ML) techniques to search for Lax pairs in the 1D setup.
A simple way to go about our ML implementation is to frame the search for these quantities as a neural network (NN) optimisation problem.
ML searches of Lax pairs and-matrices in classical and quantum integrability have been initiated in. The efficacy of problem solving depends on the neural network architecture parameters (number of layers, neurons per layer, activation function, optimiser, etc). The mathematical principle underlying this approximation technique is the universal approximation theorem, which guarantees that a continuous function on a compact subset ofcan be arbitrarily well approximated by a neural network in the limit of infinite NN length or width. Therefore, in practice, the accuracy of the approximation is bounded
by the finite extent of the NN. And so, a critical component of this approach consists in setting up a NN that upon training, produces a certain desired accuracy on the numerical Lax pair approximation. This accuracy is a value that we deem acceptable for deciding whether the system under consideration could be integrable or not.
In this section we implement an ML search for both canonical and non-canonical Lax pairs.

In our particular instance, we adopt an unsupervised learning approach wherein we consider a neural network that takes points in phase space as inputs and produces the entries for the matricesandas outputs. We do not knowanda priori, and hence start with a randomly initialised neural network, i.e. defined with randomly fixed initial parameters, and subsequently update the NN parametersto attain values optimised to minimise deviation from the Lax pair condition (or the conservation law for a given numerical current). The quantity that will be minimised is known as the loss functionand the optimisation procedure follows the gradient descent method given by

Hereis called the learning rateand measures the rate of convergence or the convergence step size oftowards optimal values.
The variablesandrespectively denote configuration space variables and their corresponding timederivatives, which together constitute the NN input.
For a 1D system withdegrees of freedom (a-dimensional configuration space) described by

data is sampled randomly from within a cube. We take 100.000 points for each of our experiments and split the data intosubsets for training and validation.
At this point we mention that for all ML experiments in this paper, the phase space point sampling was performed inwith the ML implementations done in.

As mentioned before, minimisation of the loss function must correspond to finding a pair of matricesandcorresponding to minimum deviation from the Lax pair equation (). This motivates a choice of the loss function to be

or equivalently,

The values ofat each pointare computed via the chain rule

whereandare derivatives of NN outputs with respect to inputs, and are obtained via automatic differentiation, while the values ofare supplemented from the equations of motion.

There are two principal caveats to this approach. First, the above extremisation could produce trivial solutions such as. This can be avoided in one of two ways. The simplest way is to add a regulator to the loss function.
A systematic way to do this comes from
observing that in a 1D integrable system withdegrees of freedom, anLax pair produces an infinite set of conserved quantities,}, of which at most onlyare independent and Poisson commuting, i.e. have a vanishing mutual Poisson bracket. Requiring the Hamiltonian to be one of thesecommuting integrals, eliminates trivial solutions. In our setup, we accordingly choose the Hamiltonian to be the trace of the square of the-matrix, and implement this by introducing the following Hamiltonian loss constraint,

so that the total loss function is the weighted linear combination,

withandbeing positive coefficients, which we choose to be equal to 1 for all experiments conducted in this section. The second caveat is that for a given matrix dimensionality, the afore defined loss function minimization does not uniquely fix the Lax pair. This is because, given a Lax pair, one can generate an equivalent Lax pair satisfying the Hamiltonian loss constraint by a rescalingand atransformation,

One could argue that this equivalence is not necessarily an obstacle for our searching technique, as we are only interested in proving the existence of a Lax pair and this caveat only assumes significance if we want to search for a specific Lax pair.
Further, as explained above, the results of our search algorithm are never exact, and so one must have a consistent numerical threshold tolerance, within which the extremum value of the loss function can be taken to be zero, for all intents and purposes, and the existence of this extremum can be taken as a convincing indicator of integrability.

In order to construct numerical Lax pair approximators, we start by considering the 1D Hamiltonian given in (). For concreteness we contemplate three different potentials for our experiments: the Liouville potential, the de Alfaro-Fubini-Furlan (DFF) potentialas well as a linear potential. Lax pair candidates for these systems are known and are discussed in Appendix.

For all the ML experiments performed in this section, we have employed a deep neural network architecture with three hidden layers, each containing 350 neurons with a hyperbolic tangent activation function.
This NN is to produce a Lax pairas output. Schematically, the training protocol is presented in Figure.

Throughout the training process we implement the following learning rate schedule. We start training with a learning rateofwhich we keep constant during the first 25 epochs of training. Afterwards, theis updated tofor the next 25 epochs and finally set tofor the remainder of the training process. Sampling of phase space elements is done by settingandto 1. After the training process, where we minimised the loss function (), we obtain losses of around, which correspond roughly to deviations ofaway from zero for the expression. This is shown in Figure.

Having obtained numerical Lax pairs for the models with a single degree of freedom we now proceed to explore the no scalar field model. Such a model was introduced in Section. In Appendixwe have obtained aanalytic Lax pair for a different no scalar model () in the limiting case corresponding to. For the purpose of studying the classical integrability of the 1D solution subspace that is upliftable to a 4D gravity by imposing, both these models are physically equivalent. We now implement an ML search forLax matrices, and perform the training along similar lines to the methodology described above. We have considered three cases, namely, (a), (b)and (c). The results are shown in Figure.

From () we see that in case (a) we have a free particle described by, whileis governed by a Liouville type Hamiltonian with. After training we obtain losses of the order of. In cases (b) and (c), where, we observe that the network training begins at much higher losses of orderandrespectively. However, after training, the losses are of the order of, the same order of magnitude as in the case (a). This suggests that cases (b) and (c) are as likely to be integrable as (a). Viewing theterm as a deformation of the integrable system in case (a), this is in accord with the observation ofwhich states that if the post training losses for an integrable system and its deformation are of the same order of magnitude, then the deformation has a good chance of being integrable as well. This is indeed borne out by the analytic results of Section.

Let us now consider the case of a one scalar field model. Such a model was introduced in Section. As above, we will work with a different but equivalent one scalar model given in Appendix, see
(). We will
search for non-canonical numerical Lax pairs for (a) the restricted caseand (b) the general case corresponding to, respectively. An analytic Lax pair for case (a) is given in ()
in Appendix. Accordingly, we set the dimensionality of the numerical Lax pairs to be. Recall that in order to demonstrate the integrability of the one scalar model, we need to find three integrals of motion. These have been analytically obtained for thecase as given in ().
The ML results are displayed in Figure. We observe that in both cases the loss decreases down toafter training. The comparable losses in both cases suggest that the model withis also integrable, just as thecase.

The ML experiments given above illustrate that it is possible to train NNs to minimise the loss function corresponding to the Lax pair condition. However, given that the output of these experiments consists of numerical Lax pairs with non zero losses, one must develop as sharp criteria as possible with regards to the necessary condition for the integrability of the system. Developing these integrability criteria would be all the more feasible, if the ambiguity in specifying the target Lax pairs is reduced.
Hence,
we will now use a different ML approach,
wherein we stipulate that the Lax pair be in the canonical gauge as defined in ().
Proving the existence of such a Lax pair fulfills both the necessary and sufficient conditions to establish integrability.

We now perform ML searches for diagonal Lax matrices. In the no scalar model we ML search for a diagonalmatrix, while in the one scalar model
we ML search for a diagonalmatrix. We proceed as in the ML search for numerical Lax matrices described above, using the following loss function,

where we added the regulator term to prevent generating trivial solutions for.
We have setin our ML experiments.
The ML results for the two models are presented in Figuresand, respectively. Here, as in the ML searches discussed above, we observe that in all cases the losses after training reach comparable values.

Having obtained evidence of Liouville integrability we will now proceed to implement a symbolically interpretable ML approach aimed at determining on-shell conserved quantities
for the various systems under consideration.
Our approach is to construct a generic conserved quantity as an NN output, symbolically expressed in a chosen basis of phase space variables, then work out its independent components and ultimately verify that these do Poisson commute with each other.

SECTION: Machine learning of conserved currents
We now proceed to implement our ML approach to determining currents for some of the 1D systems studied in Section.

In order to train a neural network to search for conserved currents for a given 1D system, we start by defining a setconstituted of functions of the phase space variables. Then for a given degree, we define a monomial basis constructed from the elements of,

For example, in a system with one degree of freedom one could considerand the monomial basis at degree two would be.
Denoting the monomials inas, we can use this set to write a putative current in terms of a single layer linear network,

and train to optimise the weightsto minimise the loss function

The term proportional tois a regulator that eliminates phase space independent constants. At each degree, this procedure is essentially a polynomial regression, a best fit algorithm in the space of polynomial functions of degree. Once we have obtained all the predicted on-shell conserved quantities up to a given, we need to extract from them the largest set of currents with mutually vanishing Poisson brackets, as this will form the setof conserved currentswhich, along with the Hamiltonian, are candidates for the diagonal entries ofin the canonical frame. Note that this is ultimately a numerical approximation scheme and hence will generically only serve to indicate the functional form of the putative conserved current. So, at a given, the optimisation might yield awith a few weights being orders of magnitude larger than the rest, indicating that the trueelement in this case might simply be expressed in terms of the monomials corresponding to the large weights with the remaining terms set to zero. This drastically constrains the functional search space in which to look for conserved currents, and can potentially serve as a valuable guide for analytic constructions of Lax pairs.

For the no scalar model in Section, given by () with two degrees of freedomand,is a real function.
Here we choose a different basis where the Hamiltonian too can be written as a polynomial in that basis. By looking at the action () we note that the set

can be used to reconstruct all monomials involved in the Hamiltonian at degree. There are 224 such monomials after removing the constant term, which would not yield an independent integral of motion. The linear network at degreeis then expressed as

The ML results for this linear NN applied to the no scalar model are presented in Figure, where we have chosenin the loss function (). There we observe spikes that single out 9 monomial terms from a total of 224. These are the elements with the highest weighted contribution to the ML current, and constitute a constrained set of monomials within which we can search for conserved currents. This search suggests two currents that can be constructed at degree two, which we recognise as the currentobtained analytically in Section, as well as the Hamiltonian. Further, one can explore the currents appearing at degree, where we obtain 2024 monomials. Performing the same experiment as before produces a set of monomials that allow for the construction ofandagain, as well as products and powers thereof.

The ML approach so far has served to underline pre-existing knowledge of integrability in the systems under consideration. However this approach is powerful enough to go beyond simply verifying integrability to potentially uncovering the presence of integrable structures in 1D systems.
We illustrate this by considering the one scalar model ()
in the generic case with all three parametersturned on.

For the one scalar field model we follow a similar approach to the zero scalar case that consists in choosing a basis analogous to (), that also includes exponential terms as well as derivatives of the scalar field,

At degreethis basis produces 3374 inequivalent monomials. The optimised weights obtained after training are plotted in Figure. In contrast to previous experiments we notice a stratified structure, as opposed to a clearly identifiable gap structure that could suggest a conserved current from a smaller set of monomials. Nevertheless, by restricting ourselves to monomials with weights above a chosen cutoff, enables us to reconstruct the Hamiltonian, but not the current ().
This is due to the fact that that the expression for this current involves an integral which can not be accounted for by the linear network ().

Whenand, to compare with results in Section, we use () and switch from () to the following set

which at degreeleads to 42 monomials. The ML search foris now implemented using the loss function () with.
The ML result is displayed on the left hand side of Figure. We observe two spikes in the plot, which we identify asand. Inspection of () shows thatis indeed a conserved current on-shell.

We now change strategy and perform an ML search forrather than for, aimed at picking up additional currents including those of the form ().
We restrict our discussion to a monomial basis at degree. For the one scalar model with, we enlarge the set () by

to obtain 89 monomials of at most degree two in two variables.
The ML search foris implemented using the loss function () with. The ML result is displayed on the right hand side of Figure. We observe eight spikes of comparable weight () corresponding to the monomials,,
from which one can infer a linear combination which, upon integration, yields the conserved current ().

Finally, we consider a setting in which we ML numerical approximations to conserved quantities. The setting is similar to the one described in Section. We consider a deep neural network with the same architecture as before, but with a single scalar output.
As a loss function we take

where the sum overis over all the components of the input vectorgiven in ().
If we consider the no scalar model, following a training process similar to the one described for the Lax pair, we obtain losses of the orderafter training for the numerical neural network current. Further, knowing that the currents for this system areand, we perform a polynomial regression up to degree 3 inand.
This procedure yields the expression,

with a fit accuracy of 92% over the whole data set.

We have also performed a similar experiment for the one scalar field model with, applying a similar regression procedure. Here we know thatandare conserved currents for the system. Performing a polynomial regression up to degree 3 inand, we obtain

with a fit accuracy of 40% only. This low accuracy indicates that the basis of currents,for our polynomial regression is incomplete.

SECTION: Conclusions
In this paper we have identified integrability structures in 2D gravitational theories resulting from a
2-step reduction of certain 4D gravitational theories describing the coupling of Maxwell fields and neutral scalar fieldsto gravity in the presence of a scalar potential. Restricting ourselves to the subspace of solutions given in (), we have demonstrated that a subset of the 2D equations of motion can be viewed as compatibility equations for a linear system, which in turn can be represented in terms of differential operators, and which reduces to the BM system in the vanishing scalar potential case. Our 2D integrability analysis has 2 caveats. Firstly, it can only be applied to solutions which continue to exist as the scalar potential is taken to zero. Secondly, the linear system encodes only part of the equations of motion and guarantees only partial integrability.

Recognising that our chosen solution subspace is amenable to a 1D reduction, both these caveats can be circumvented by a complementary analysis of this subspace from a 1D point of view. For this purpose we consider an effective 1D theory whose solution space contains the class of solutions defined bywhich correspond to the chosen subspace of 4D gravitational configurations.

Subsequently we analyse Liouville integrability realised by constructing a Lax pair of matricesin these models. We adopt a canonical frame wherein we can chooseto be an identity matrix of dimension equal to that of the configuration space, whileis a diagonal matrix. The Lax equation then renders the diagonal elements to be constants of motion. We choose the Hamiltonian to be one of the diagonal elements. Only for an integrable system can we write down thematrix with the diagonal filled up by independent conserved currents including the Hamiltonian. That is, a system is integrable iff such amatrix exists.
This effectively implies that the 1D criterion for integrability of the 4D solution subspace under consideration reduces to determining the number of independent Poisson commuting conserved currents.

Our results are constituted of ML driven numerical searches for Lax pairs as well as their analytic constructions, both canonical and generic, as well as construction of conserved currents as functions of phase space variables, by both analytic techniques as well as symbolic regression in ML.
We find that the ML implementation of numerical Lax searches in a given model can act as a indicator of integrability, when comparing the loss function value for this search with that of a Lax search in a system known to be integrable. The symbolic regression technique offers a framework to systematically detect integrability through verifying the existence or lack thereof of conserved currents in the chosen basis of phase space variables.

To sum up, in this note, we have illustrated, with examples, a proof-of-concept point about how ML approaches could be implemented effectively in the study of integrable structures. Our ML algorithm incorporates broad non-model dependent physics principles that help transcode the problem of searching for matrix Lax pairs to functional regression problems, rendering the approach applicable to systems whose integrability structures are not known a priori.
Hence, as opposed to prior literaturein this subject, which has used ML techniques to validate analytically known integrable structures, our ML approach does not use an a priori knowledge of the integrability of the system and augments our analytic search for integrals of motion.

SECTION: Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Giorgi Butbaia, Gianluca Inverso, Yang-Hui He, Vishnu Jejjala, Axel Kleinschmidt, Shailesh Lal, Swapna Mahapatra, Suvajit Majumdar, Challenger Mishra, Thomas Mohaupt, Silvia Nagy, Justin Tan and Alessandro Torrielli for helpful discussions.
The authors are supported
by FCT/Portugal through
through project UIDB/04459/2020 with DOI identifier 10-54499/UIDP/04459/2020.
The authors would like to thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences for support and hospitality during the programwhen work on this paper was undertaken; this work was supported by EPSRC grant number EP/R014604/1.

SECTION: The field equations in two dimensions
We consider the two-dimensional Lagrangian () and derive the associated equations of motion using standard techniques.
For the benefit of the reader, we work out the various steps involved.

First we consider the equations of motion for the scalar fields encoded in.
We will denote these scalar fields by; they include the scalar fields.
Using

we obtain

Now we use the fact thatis an element of the Lie algebra, whose generators we denote by.
Note that theare constant matrices, and that their number equals the number of fields.
We therefore have

Then, the equation of motion () can be written as

Denoting

and assuming thatis invertible with inverse, i.e., we obtain

Contracting this equation withgives

where the functionis given by

Using (), we establish the relation

Takingto be a flat metric given in (),
and using (), the field equation () can be written as

Next, varying the Lagrangian () with respect togives the equations of motion

Takingto be the flat metric given in (), these field equations become

Combining the third equation with the fourth equation gives the first equation. We may therefore take the first, second, third and fifth equations as independent
equations.

Next, we analyse the solvability of the field equations ().
Taking the-derivative of the third equation and adding it totimes the-derivative of the fifth equation yields

where we used the first two field equations given in () as well as () and
(). On the other hand, taking the-derivative of the third equation and subtracting the-derivative of the fifth equation gives

where we used the first two field equations given in () as well as () and
().

We note that equations () and ()
are automatically satisfied, since they can be written as

Here we have made use of the fact that sincehas the form given in (), we have

Summarizing, the independent field equations are

together with

SECTION: Families of Lax pairs for 1D models
A 1D system described by the Hamiltonian

admits several
Lax pairs, i.e. pairssatisfying

on-shell.
Consider the following non-canonical pair

whereandare functions ofandand whereis a parameter. One can show that this pair satisfies () by virtue of Hamilton’s equationsand. Thus, regardless of the particular choice of the functionsand, this pairconstitutes a Lax pair that also
depends on the parameter.
Furthermore we note that

provided thatis expressed in terms of the potentialby

which we will assume to be the case in the following.

Next, let us pick specific choices for the functionsand.
First, let us chooseand let us set, in which case ()
becomes

which describes a family of Lax pairs for the system described by (). This family is only defined for positive. A different family of Lax pairs, which is valid also for, is obtained by choosing,and,

Next, we will use these two specific families of Lax pairs as a guide to constructing Lax pairs for the systems described by the
Lagrangians discussed in Section.

First, let us consider the action (). By redefining the integration variable as, this action can
be recast as

We notice that when, the two fieldsanddecouple, in which case the action describes two decoupled systems of the form, each with a description in terms of a Lax pair as described above. Thus, usingand choosing, a Lax pair describing these two decoupled systems is
given by

When switching on, we expect thesematrices to get deformed
by terms proportional to.
However, we were not able to obtain these deformedmatrices, and so in Sectionwe instead presented a Lax pair
for the full system based onmatricesand.

Next, let us consider the action ().
By redefining the integration variable as, this action can be recast as

Let us now consider three limiting cases of (), resulting from switching off one of the three parameters.

First, let us consider the case when. Redefining the fields as

the Lagrangian becomes

The three fieldsandare thus decoupled, each having a description in terms
of a Lax pair as described above. A Lax pair describing these three decoupled systems
is given by the followingmatrices,

We note thatsatisfies. Since the system is decoupled we can write down three independent Poisson commuting conserved currents

Next let us consider the case. The action () can be brought to a form similar to () by redefining the fieldsandas,. In this basis the action becomes

In this case we find three
Poisson commuting conserved quantities, namely

where.
Note that the currentis precisely the currentidentified in Section.

Finally, let us consider the case. Definingand, the action () becomes

from which we infer the following conserved quantities

where.

SECTION: Machine Learning Lax pairs
A particular feature of neural networks is their success at making predictions over large data sets. However, reverse engineering the network to obtain what it is actually doing is less trivial. The problem at hand was to build neural networks that can produce Lax pairs for a given system as a first step towards demonstrating their integrability. In order for the network to produce a sensible result, finding an analytic expression is unavoidable.

If a Lax pair exists one expects the Lax pair equation () to be satisfied identically over the entire phase space. A neural network could then be used to approximateandas neural network outputs. However one has to bear in mind the following. First, neural networks are better suited to make predictions over compact domains. Hence we expect a neural network to give a good approximation only over a compact domain that contains the training set. Second, since we do not work at any of the limits where the universal approximation holds, we have to rely on a neural network that is expressive enough (enough layers, enough neurons per layer, suitable activation function), such that upon training, the error in the approximation can be controlled by a parametersuch that

withbeing the NN approximation function for thecomponent of, and similarly for. The parameteris an architecture dependent quantity and it is supposed to approach zero as one reaches either infinite width or infinite length, provided a Lax pair exists. However, we are limited to work with a finite network, and therefore must look for a
suitable NN architecture for our problem, since a systematic architecture analysis is not feasible with the resources at our disposal.

Using the neural network as an approximation for a Lax pair in a system where no analytic Lax pair is known, presents us with the issue of decidability. When no
analytical expressions forandare known, one can not estimatefor a NN approximation. The only parameter at hand is the loss function which, as in (), can be designed to measure deviations from the Lax equation (with additional regulator terms). After training, the loss is going to be fixed at a certain value different from zero, and therefore we must judge if that value is small enough to ensure the robustness of the numerical approximation. In the following we highlight the basic differences between the numerical Lax pair approximation by NNs and the framing of the actual Lax pair search as an optimisation problem.

If we construct a neural network with traditional activation functions (e.g. ReLU, sigmoid, tanh) the output produced is going to be an analytic expression, given as a composition of activation functions at each network layer and decorated with weights and biases. This analytic expression is then used to generate aLax pair. A numerical Lax pair is a pair of matricesandwhose entries are neural network outputs such that after training the Lax loss (i.e. a loss that measures deviations fromandsatisfying the Lax pair equation ()) reaches values below a certain threshold value. The result is a pair of matrices with numerical values at each phase space point. Furthermore, the training is performed over a compact set in phase space, where the loss function takes an acceptably small minimum value. As we move away from this region the NN approximation will become worse. These factors limit the interpretability of the output in terms of deciding whether the system is integrable or not.

Approximating the Lax pair by neural networks (NNs) has the inherent problem of interpretability: even in the case of small numerical deviations from the Lax pair equation (), the Lax pair approximations are hard to recast into an interpretable form, i.e. into analytic expressions that actually satisfy the Lax pair equation. If we take the existence of the Lax pair as the criterion for integrability of the 1D systems under consideration, one has to convert these numerical values into a meaningful functional output that exactly satisfies the Lax pair equation.

If after training, an acceptably small loss is reached, this may hint at the integrability of the system:
consider a system for which a Lax pair is known; after training one obtains a numerical Lax pair for this system. This output provides a measure of what type of loss is to be expected for the given NN architecture and the type of system under consideration. We now switch on a deformation and train again to obtain a numerical Lax pair for the deformed system. If the loss at the end of the training process is of the same order as the one obtained for the undeformed system, then we consider the deformation to have a good chance of being integrable as well. This type of analysis is carried out in Section. In order to ensure that the deformed system has a chance of being integrable, the numerical ML output has to be made concrete by casting the numerical Lax pair into an analytic one, valid over the whole phase space. One possible means to achieve this is to apply symbolic regression: some options to try in this direction are packages such as PySR. We leave this for future work.

An alternative way is to use NNs that simulate the evolution of parameters in the physical problem.
This requires making assumptions, such as what type of functional expressions appear in the entries of the Lax pair, and what is a suitable basis for those terms. We denote these asLax pairs. Since we work with suitable non-standard activation functions, this interpretable approach can not be generalised to any other one dimensional Hamiltonian, as the choice of a basis is model dependent. While in this case one trains again over a compact dataset, there is the chance that upon training the resulting approximation functions can be turned into actual analytical results, valid away from the training set. We explore this alternative in Section.

At last, let us make a comment about the dimensionality of the Lax pairs. In Appendixwe presented two families ofLax pairs for 1D models with one degree of freedom.
We then used these families to construct Lax pairs
for the 1D systems discussed in Section, in cases where the chosen degrees of freedom are decoupled. The 1D systems
discussed in Sectionhavedegrees of freedom,of which correspond toscalar fields in four dimensions. Since in these decoupling cases, the analytic Lax pair description was based onmatrices, for the ML experiments in the general case, we have taken the Lax pair for these systems to also have the same matrix dimensionality.

SECTION: References