SECTION: Schatten classes and commutators of Riesz transforms in the two weight setting

We characterize the Schatten classof the commutator of Riesz transformsin() in the two weight setting for,
by introducing the condition that the symbolbeing in Besov spaces associated with the given two weights.
At the critical index, the commutatorbelongs to Schatten classif and only ifis a constant, and to the weak Schatten classif and only ifis in an oscillation sequence space associated with the given two weights.
As a direct application, we have the Schatten class estimate for A. Connes’ quantised derivative in the two weight setting.

SECTION: 1.Introduction

Suppose. Letbe in the Muckenhoupt class,,
and denote bytheth Riesz transform on,.
In[2]Bloom first showed that the commutator, defined as,
is bounded fromtoif and only ifis in,
which extends the remarkable result of Coifman–Rochberg–Weiss[3].
Just recently, the first and second authors[19]showed thatis compact fromtoif and only ifis invia a constructive proof.
This was also addressed in[14,15]via extrapolation.
A next step in this program is to understand the Schatten class membership
(the definition is given in §2.3) of the commutator as this is a more refined property than compactness.

Schatten class estimates provide a better understanding of the behaviour of compact operators in infinite dimensional spaces
and connect to non-commutative analysis, geometry, and complex analysis
(see for example[30,5,27,18,16,24,23]).
It is well-known from Peller[25]that the commutator with the Hilbert transformis in the Schatten classif and only ifis in the Besov spacefor.
While in the higher dimensional case, there is a “cut-off” phenomenon in the sense that
when, if,, is inthenmust be a constant.
At the critical index,is in the weak Schatten classif and only ifis in the homogeneous Sobolev space.
This further links to theestimate for the quantised derivative,,
of Alain Connes[4, Chapter], whereis thedimensional Dirac operator,
andis the multiplication operator:. Details of these notation will be stated in the last section.
This has been intensively studied, see for example[6,8,9,23,28,29,17,5].
We note that in[23,8]they implemented a new approach to prove that for,is in theif and only ifis in the homogeneous Sobolev space.

The Schatten class forin the two weight setting was first studied in[20],
where only the casewas solved, and the questions forand for the higher dimensional case were raised.

In this paper, we address these questions by establishing the Schatten classcharacterisation for the Riesz transform commutator,,
in the two weight setting in.
We also characterise the critical index in the two weight setting for both Schatten classand weak Schatten class.
The key is to introduce the suitable Besov space and sequence spaces
associated with the given two weights and to use the approach of martingales. The idea and techniques in this paper give the answer to Schatten classforin the two weight setting for. Note that the case foris still not clear.

Throughout this paper, we assume.

We now introduce the Besov spaces associated with the weight.

Supposeand. Letbe any dyadic system in.
For,
we say thatif the following sequence

is in. Hereis the average ofover. We set

The specific value of the parameterhere is not essential, we choose it
to ensure the subsequent arguments proceed smoothly.
We will show in Section3thatis contained in.

The main result is the following, which addresses the question in[20].

Letbe theth Riesz transform onwith,.
Suppose,and set.
Suppose.
Then commutatorbelongs toif and only if.
Moreover, we have

where the implicit constants depend onand.

The proof of Theorem1.2proceeds by translating the inequality into a form more symmetric with respect to the weights,
and then relying upon familiar (but in this context, new) dyadic methods.
Using the approach of Petermichl, Treil and Volberg in[26], we can represent the Riesz transforms as dyadic shifts.
The commutator is then seen to be a sum of paraproduct type operators.
The dyadic formalism allows easy access to the important method of
nearly weakly orthogonal sequences of Rochberg and Semmes[29].
The dyadic methods give the continuous result, as the Besov space is the intersection of a finite number of dyadic Besov spaces. We note that following the same idea and techniques, the characterization in Theorem1.2also holds for the Schatten–Lorentz class,, via assuming the sequencesdefined in Definition1.1to be in.

The tools we need include a dyadic characterization for the Besov space,
that is,coincides with the intersection of several ‘translated’ copies of
the dyadic weighted Besov space(see Theorem3.4in Section3);
and the Schatten class characterization of the paraproductwith symboldefined as

and its adjoint (see Proposition4.2in Section4):

It is natural to further ask the question on the critical indexas this is an important fact
due to the work of Janson–Wolff[17](see also[7,8]).
We give a criterion in this two weight setting, i.e., and.
By using these weights we recover the classical phenomenon in[17]when theweightis the Lebesgue measure.

Letbe theth Riesz transform onwith,.
Supposeand set.
Supposeand.
Ifbelongs to,
thenmust be a constant almost everywhere.

Next, it is natural to explore the weak Schatten class estimate for the critical index.
We now introduce the corresponding new function space of weighted oscillation.

Suppose. For,
we say thatif the following sequence

is in(a sequenceis inifwiththe non-increasing rearrangement of).
Hereis the average ofover. We set

From this definition we see directly that(explained at the beginning of Section6).
In fact, we can further show that(henceis compact when). We will prove this in Section6.
We also note that whenandare constants,will become
the standard homogeneous Sobolev space(see for example[7]).

To continue, we establish the following equivalent characterization ofwith, where.
This is crucial to the characterization for the weak Schatten class.

Supposeand set.can be characterized equivalently as follows:

where the implicit constants are independent of.

Then we have the following characterization for the weak Schatten class.

Letbe theth Riesz transform onwith,.
Supposeand set.
Suppose.
Thenbelongs toif and only if, with

where the implicit constants depends onand.

The key idea is to introduce a suitable version of oscillation sequence space and characterize its structures,
and then expand the localized Riesz commutator kernel via martingales. We highlight that with the two weights involved, this expansion does not fall into the scope of the classical ones.
Part of the expansion further links to the nearly weakly orthogonal sequences (NWOs) of functions associated with the weightsand, while the other part is not NWO but requires a more direct verification.

It is still an open question whetheris equivalent to some two-weight Sobolev spaces.

Regarding the two weight Besov space in dimension one introduced by the first, second and third authors in[20],
it is natural to explore a two weight Besov space of the following form, i.e., via the Sobolev–Slobodeckii norms.

Suppose,and set.
Let. We say thatbelongs to the weighted Besov spaceif

We point out that this will lead to a slightly different version of characterisations:belongs toif and only if.
Moreover, we have

Note that this setting is well-defined sinceimply that,. Hence,.
As this is of independent interest regarding the different versions of two weight Besov spaces, we refer readers to the full details in Version 1 of our paper[21].

This paper is organized as follows.
In Section2we introduce the necessary preliminaries in the two weight setting and the Schatten classes.
In Section3we characterize the dyadic structure for the weighted Besov space.
In Section4we present the proof of Theorem1.2.
In Section5we provide the proof of Theorem1.3for the critical index.
In Section6we study the properties of the weighted oscillation spaceand prove Theorem1.5,
and in Section7we give the proof of Theorem1.6.
As an application, we have the Schatten class estimate for the quantised derivative of A. Connes,
which will be briefly addressed in the last section.

SECTION: 2.Preliminaries

We recall some preliminaries for the dyadic systems and the Schatten class.

SECTION: 2.1.Dyadic system in

Let the collectiondenote the standard system of dyadic cubes in, where

with

Next, we recall shifted dyadic systems of dyadic cubes in.

For,
we can define the dyadic system,

where

It is straightforward to check thatinherits the nestedness property of:
if, then.
See[13,22]for more details.
When the particular choice ofis unimportant,
the notationis sometimes used for a generic dyadic system.

The fundamental property of the adjacent dyadic systems is the following: for any ballin,
there exists a dyadic cubefor some,
such that

whereis a positive constant independent of,and.

SECTION: 2.2.An expression of Haar functions

For any dyadic cube,
there exist dyadic intervalsonwith common length,
such that. Thenis associated withHaar functions:

whereand

Writingwhenfor all,is non-cancellative;
on the other hand, when,
the rest of theHaar functionsassociated withsatisfy the following properties:

For, we have

is supported onand;

, for;

if, thenfor;

;

noting that the average of a functionover a dyadic cube:can be expressed as:

whereis a constant;

fixing a cube, and expandingin the Haar basis, we have

denote by, then we have

We will also use the notation

SECTION: 2.3.Characterization of Schatten Class

Letandbe separable complex Hilbert spaces.
Supposeis a compact operator fromto,
letbe the adjoint operator, it is clear thatis a compact,
self-adjoint, non-negative operator fromto.
Letbe an orthonormal basis forconsisting of eigenvectors of,
and letbe the eigenvalue corresponding to the eigenvector.
The numbers, are called the singular values of.
If,and the sequence of singular values is-summable (with respect to a weight),
thenis said to belong to the Schatten–Lorentz class.
That is,,, and,.
Clearly,.

In 1989, Rochberg and Semmes[29]introduced methods that are very useful
in estimating Schatten norms in the setting of commutators.
A key concept is that ofnearly weakly orthogonal(NWO) sequences of functions.

Letbe a collection of functions.
We sayis aNWOsequence,
ifand the maximal functionis bounded on,
whereis defined as

In this paper, we work with weighted versions. We will use the following result proved by Rochberg and Semmes.

If the collection of functionsare supported onand satisfy for some,,
thenis aNWOsequence.

Let,be separable complex Hilbert spaces.
In[29]Rochberg and Semmes provided a substitute for
the Schmidt decomposition of the operator

withandbeing NWO sequences andis a sequence of scalars.
From[29, Corollary 2.8]we see that

When, Rochberg and Semmes also obtained

For any bounded compact operatoron, andandNWOsequences, then for,

SECTION: 2.4.Muckenhoupt weights

Letbe a nonnegative locally integrable function on.
For, we sayis anweight, written, if

where the supremum is taken over all cubes.
The quantityis called theconstant of.

It is well known thatweights are doubling. Namely,

Let. Then for everyand for every cube,

In this article, we will also use the reverse Hölder inequality forweights.

Let.
There is a reverse doubling index,
such that for every cube, we have

Supposefor some.
For,for.
Moreover,.

SECTION: 2.5.Weight BMO and VMO spaces

We recall the weighted BMO space and VMO space and their dyadic versions.

Suppose.
A functionbelongs toif

where the supremum is taken over all balls.
The dyadic weightedBMOspaceassociated withconsists of functionssuch that,
where theis defined the same as above with intervals replaced by dyadic cubes.

Suppose.
A functionbelongs toif

,

,

,

whereis any fixed point in.
A functionbelongs to the dyadic weightedVMOspaceif the above three limits hold with intervals replaced by dyadic cubes in.

SECTION: 3.Weighted Besov spaceand its dyadic versions

As a companion to the definition of the weighted Besov space, in Definition1.1,
we have its dyadic versions ondefined here.

Suppose.
Supposeand.
Letandbe an arbitrary dyadic system in.
Thenbelongs to the weighted dyadic Besov spaceassociated with, if and only if

This space has several alternate definitions, which are useful in different ways.
Among them, an equivalent set of definitions in terms of Haar functions will be very useful
in the analysis of the Haar shift paraproducts to come.

Suppose,and set.
We have the equivalences below

where the termcan be any of the expressions below:

For each, it follows from Hölder’s inequality that

where the “” above holds by.
Similarly, the last term above is approximately equal to the first one, due to.

Therefore, it suffices to prove (3.2) for taking.

Step I.Note that

When, by using concavity property of, we see that

When, the doubling property ofensures that there exists, such that for anyandwith, we have. Note that for any,
we can choose somesuch that. Then

Based on this, we further have

Step II.On the other hand, by the cancellation and size properties of Haar functions,

as desired. The proof is complete.
∎

As a consequence,
the dyadic Besov spaces have alternative definitions in terms of martingale differences.

Suppose,and set.
We have the equivalent (semi-)norms

where the implicit constants are independent of.

Note that for,

this is simply because all norms on a finite-dimensional space are equivalent
(the space isover the children ofwhich has dimension).

Hence, the first equivalence in (3.3) follows from (3.2)
with takingtherin as.

Furthermore, note that the martingale differenceis constant on every child of. This yields that

Thus the second equivalence in (3.3) follows from (3.2)
with takingtherin as.

The proof of the remaining third one is similar, and we skip it.
∎

The weighted Besov space is the intersection of a finite number of dyadic Besov spaces.

Supposeand.
We have

with equivalent (semi-)norms

Note that every adjacent dyadic system is constructed by shifting from the standard dyadic system; see Definition2.2. Hence
for anyand,
there existssuch that

Then the doubling property ofimplies that

Moreover, by the size condition and the nestedness property of dyadic cubes,

is finite and only depends on. Hence,.

On the other hand, the adjacent dyadic systems ensure that
for any, there exists someandsuch that

Similarly, the number of such eachforcontained in a sameis bounded uniformly, and

Then

The proof is complete.
∎

Now we assure ourselves that our Besov spaces are contained in the VMO spaces.

Suppose thatand. Then

Note that

for any.

Moreover, we are able to apply the analogous argument in[20, Lemma 3.4]to deduce thatfor.
∎

Note that from[22],

Hence, by Lemma3.5, we have

Therefore, it follows from[19, Theorem 1.1]that when,
the commutator of the Riesz transformis compact fromto,.

Suppose,and set.
We have the following equivalence for the Besov space:

This is implied by the proof of Lemma6.3below. See Remark6.4for further results.

SECTION: 4.Schatten class estimate for: proof of Theorem1.2

SECTION: 4.1.Sufficiency

We are studying the Schatten norms of the commutators in the case thatis larger than the dimension.
We first address the sufficiency of the symbol being in the Besov space for the Schatten norm estimate.

Suppose,and set.
Let, then we have

We depend on the work of Petermichl, Treil and Volberg[26].
They have shown that Riesz transforms are averages of relatively simple dyadic shifts.
Given a dyadic systemwith Haar basis,
letsatisfyingfor all.
Using the same notation for a map,
ifthen set.
The resulting dyadic shift operator is

It is known that for any,.
Moreover, the Riesz transforms are in the convex hull of the class of operators, see[26].
This result involves a random choice of dyadic systems, which implies that whenever considering the commutator,
it suffices to prove that the norms ofassociated to different dyadic systems,
are uniformly controlled with respect to the choice of.

The commutator with the Haar shift operatorcan be represented in terms of the paraproducts and:

where

and

See[12]for details.
The point of this expansion is that it gives us a finite sum of paraproducts composed withbounded operators.
To give one example, we have

This depends upon the condition that.
If the operatorcomesbeforethe paraproduct,
a similar inequality holds, and we use the condition that.
As a consequence, we have

where

To continue, we have to estimate thenorm for each of the four terms above.
We address three of them here.

Suppose,and set.
Let.
Then,andbelong torespectively,
if and only if, that is,

with the implicit constants depending only on,and,
regardless of the choice of.

For our main theorem, we only need the upper bounds, or sufficiencies, above.
We include the lower bounds for completeness.

Both directions will depend on the nearly weakly orthogonal sequence approach of Rochberg and Semmes.

Sufficiency for (4.2):Suppose.
It follows from the definition ofthat

Denote

Using the reverse Hölder inequality forweights in Lemma2.8,
bothandare NWO sequences for,
which gives using (2.3) that

Necessity for (4.2):Suppose. Note that for eachand,.
Then

Denote

Similarly, these two collections of functions are also NWOs. Since, by Lemma2.6it holds that

That is, we have established (4.2). The second estimate (4.3) is dual to the first,
so it holds.

It remains to prove the last estimate (4.4).

Sufficiency for (4.4):Suppose.
By the definition of, we have

Denote

Similarly,
these two collections of functions are also NWOs.

Therefore, using (2.3)

Necessity for (4.4):For anyand,
note that for eachand,

Therefore,

Similarly, we have by Lemma2.6

This completes the argument.
∎

The last of the four terms to address is defined in (4.1), which is done here. We only assert the sufficiency.

Suppose,and set.
Letand denote.
We have

with the implicit constants depending only on,and, regardless of the choice of.

By definitions ofand the paraproduct operator,

Recall that,
wheredenotes the constant value ofon, thus

Therefore,

Due to,
similar to the argument in Proposition4.2, we have

as desired.
∎

Combining Propositions4.2,4.3, we have

for.
That is, the Schatten norm is controlled by the Besov space norm,
which is the conclusion of Proposition4.1.

SECTION: 4.2.Necessity

We turn to the necessity of the Besov norm condition. This will complete the proof of Theorem1.2.

Supposeand setfor.
Supposewith,
thenwith

We setup an alternate norm for the Besov space, adapted to a particular Riesz transform.

There are absolute constants and integerso that this holds for any grid.
Fix.
For all, for integer, there are functions

where

are contained in, and elements of;

The span of theequals the range of;

does not change signs where, andis the kernel of theth Riesz transform;

, where;

We have the equivalence of norms

Since the weights in question are doubling, thehave the spanning property listed above,
and all norms on finite dimensional space are equivalent, we have

In comparison to our definition of the dyadic Besov space in (3.1),
we are using the difference of conditional expectations, which differ byinstead of.
Then, by the spanning properties of the, the equivalence (4.6) follows.

The approach is to construct themeeting all but property (4.6).
And, in addition, the span of theis the range of.

We can fix, for which the kernel of the Riesz transform is, for.
Fix. The vector space of the range ofhas dimension, and consists of functions with zero integral, constant on the grandchildren of.
The grandchildren ofare the cubesconsisting of
all the cubes, which are contained in.
Letbe the center of. Then our basis is the collection of functions

That is, we form the difference of the indicator function of two cubes inprovided they arenot adjacent in the first coordinate.
Call the pairsthat meet this conditionadmissible.

is certainly a system of functions, bounded in number independently of the choice of.
They satisfy the cancellation and size conditions claimed by Lemma2.3,
and satisfy the conditions relative to the kernel.
It is not immediately clear that their span is as required, namely
the range of.
This is an elementary argument, which completes this proof.

We claim that everywithis in the linear span of the functions with admissible pairs.
This immediately implies the required spanning property.
There are two cases.
First, suppose thatsuch that there is a
a third cubeso thatandare admissible.
It is clear thatis in the linear span ofand.

Second, if this is not the case, it must be thatareadjacentin the first coordinate.
Then, pickandso that,andare admissible.
It follows thatis in the linear span of the threeand. The proof is complete.
∎

For a fixed,

We will recognize the right hand side as an expression involving NWO functions.
Now, we inspect a single inner product in the sum above.
Recall the definition ofin (4.5) and the property (iii) in Proposition4.5, we have

On the right-hand side, we insertand.
That with some manipulations leads to

Denote

Then, we have

Moreover, bothandare NWOs. Indeed, by Lemma2.8, there exists a constant, such thatsatisfies thereverse Hölder inequality. Let,

and the argument foris similar.

Hence, we have a replacement for the Schmidt decomposition forand so by Lemma2.6we have

Combining this and (4.8), the proof is finished .
∎

SECTION: 5.Critical index: proof of Theorem1.3

Let all the notation be the same as in Theorem1.3.
We will show that ifis non-constant, then the Schattennorm of the weighted commutator is infinite.

We begin by considering non-constant.
Thus,is non-zero at some.
And, we can further assume thatis a Lebesgue point of,, and does not fall on the boundary of any of our shifted dyadic cubes.
From these considerations, this follows.
There exists, so that for any dyadic grid,
and lettingbe the cube inwhich contains, we have

Note that the argument of the inequality (4.10) ensures that it also holds for, that is,

For the same dyadic grid, we apply the following equivalence again

and we claim that the sum on the right-hand side is infinite. Fix a cubecontainingwith. Without loss of generality, assume thatfor somesufficiently large. Then, for any cubewith,
we haveon at least one grandchildof, whereindependent of, provided by the mean value theorem of integrals and the fact that there existssuch that the set

whereis one point atsatisfying. Roughly speaking, for given, the vectorsinceis small enough, and the above fact can be verified by checking the angles between any given vector in(without loss of generality, assume it as) and the vector composed of the vertexchosen from a grandchildof,.

Hence, we have by application of theconditions and (5.1) to see

In general, consider.
Following the proof of Proposition4.4, we have

Letbe a nonnegative function inwith.
Denoteand let,
then.
Note that forsufficiently small,

where. For any fixedand for,

then the translation invariance of the kernelofyields

Observe that

andby definition.
Hence

This yields that forsufficiently small,

Nevertheless, a similar argument yields that if the smooth functionis non-constant,
then. Henceis constant almost everywhere
whenbelongs to.
Sinceas, we obtainis constant as well.

We note thatis critical.
In fact, for, we see that there are many non-constant functions in.
For example, we takeand,
where.
Then both.
Next, we choose, with,supp, wherewith,
andfor.
Then we see that all such functionswith.

SECTION: 6.Oscillation spaces associated with two weights: proof of Theorem1.5

We begin with three auxiliary lemmas, to study the structure of the
weighted oscillation sequence space.

Suppose.
Then.

For eachand,
it follows from Definition2.2that there existssatisfyingand.
Using the doubling property ofweights, there exists a positive constantsuch that

where

Hence, combined with Definition1.4,
we see that for each function,
we have.
∎

In fact, we further have the following argument.

Suppose.
Then.

Based on Lemma6.1, for each,
it suffices to verify thatsatisfies the three limiting conditions
concerning the weighted mean oscillation over balls, as listed in Definition2.11.

Recall that the adjacent dyadic systems possess the property that
there exists a positive constantsuch that for any ball,
there existsfor some,
satisfyingand.
Combining the argument in Lemma6.1, we have that for any ball,
there existssuch that
the weighted mean oscillation ofoveris governed by,
which was defined as in (6.4). Therefore, it remains to prove that

We verify the first condition.
That is, it will be shown that for any, there exists, such that

Otherwise, there exists a sequenceinsuch thatuniformly for some, andas.
Thus,
whereis the non-increasing rearrangement of.
This contradicts.
Hence the first limiting condition holds. The proofs of the remaining two conditions are similar.
∎

Next we show thathas the following properties which are crucial for Theorem1.5.

Supposeand set.
For, assume that the sequence

then:

There is a smooth functiononwith, a.e., and

is in,
where. Moreover, we have

The sequencesand

are both inwith norms dominated by.

We will begin by proving (1), and then apply it to show (2).

Letbe a smooth function on, which is supported inand satisfies.

Letand definefor.
For each, where,
let, we have

where the positive constantis independent of,and.
As a consequence, there exists a positive constantsuch that
for eachand,

Note that

up to a zero measure set, and the interiors ofare mutually disjoint. Therefore,

where the last inequality follows from the fact that

withthe non-increasing rearrangement of.
That is,,
and we complete the proof of (1).

It remains to show (2). Observe that

For the term,
writingto see

Similarly,

Obviously,

Note that the operatordefined on the sequenceby

is a bounded map ofto itself.
Hence it suffices to consider

and its analogy

Let,
then.
By the convexity of the power function,

By observing that

we have

We claim that the operatordefined on the sequenceby

is a bounded map ofto itself.
By interpolation (see for example[1, Section 5.3]),
it suffices to show thatis bounded onfor.

To see this, note that for, by definition we have

Now we consider the case.
The doubling property ofensures that there exists, such that for anyandwith, we have. Note that for any, thenand we can choose somesuch that. Hence

Based on this, we obtain that

Similarly,

and an analogous of the argument for the-boundedness ofcan deduce that
the operatordefined on the sequenceby

is also a bounded map ofto itself.

From the above, we obtain that the sequenceis inand its norm is dominated by.

In the end, observe that,
By definition, for each,

this allows that the argument of the sequence

is similar, and we skip it. The proof is complete.
∎

We first note that by Hölder’s inequality, we have

and

Next, from Lemma6.3, we have the reverse inequalities of the above two inequalities.
Thus, the proof of Theorem1.5is complete.
∎

Combining the interpolation theory of Lorentz spaces (see for example[1, Section 5.3]),
the argument in Lemma6.3indeed deduces the equivalence that

for anyand.

SECTION: 7.Weak Schatten class estimate at critical index: proof of Theorem1.6

Throughout this section, letbe theth Riesz transform onwith,.
Supposeand set.

SECTION: 7.1.Proof of the sufficient condition

In this subsection, we assume that,
then prove that

By noting that

it suffices to show that.

Let,
and.
Assuming thatis a dyadic Whitney decomposition family of the open set,
that is,and;
see[11, Appendix J.1]for instance.
Therefore, we write,
andcan be the cubes, where,
have the same side length and that distance between them must be comparable to this side-length, due to

whereis the center of.
More precisely, we have.

Thus, for each dyadic cube,is related toand at mostof the cubessuch that,
wheredepends only on the dimension.
Therefore, let, there issuch that,
where, we can reorganize the sum

whereand.

Assumeis sufficiently small such that.
Take a smooth functiononwith, satisfyingonandfor every multi-index.
Now define, whereis the center of.
It’s clear thatand.

For each,

Expanding in a multiple Fourier series on, we can write

where,,,
and

For any,
note thathas the regularity condition

which, in combination with the fact that, yields

Hence, one may applyto see

Let, then

and so

whereand.
Then, we get

Thus, the kernel ofcan be represented as

Note that for each,contains.
We rewriteas.
Then

We begin by verifing.

We introduce the notation

and write

Then we set

and

We first consider.
Asis, it follows from Lemma2.8that there is a, so
that for each dyadic cube,

With this choice of,

Hence,is a NWO sequence.

Next, we considerfor.

Thus, for everywith, we have

Therefore, for

we now consider the expansion ofwith. By the NWO property of(Definition2.4), we know that

is bounded on.

Thus, we have

Note also numberssatisfyfor all multi-indices, which guarantees the summationin the right-hand side of (7.1).

The estimate (7.1) says that the operator with kernelis-boundedness; moreover, in combination with arguments in[29, (7.39)]and its context, we obtain that this operator satisfies the aimed operator norm in the form of (2.3), as required.

W now consider. Let

Then

We set

and

Note thathas the same construct of. Meanwhile,(reps.) plays the role of(resp.).
Therefore, a similar argument yields thatis a NWO sequence. And hence, similar to the approach as in (7.1), for,

as desired.

Hence,

and numberswhich satisfyfor all multi-indices.
Thus, combining (7.1), (7.6), (2.3) and Definition1.4, we have

Then we see that.

SECTION: 7.2.Proof of the necessary condition

We now assume that,
then prove that.

First, for each, similar to the proof of Proposition4.4,
one may choose another dyadic cube, such that:
(i)and;
(ii) the kernel of Riesz transformdoes not change sign for all, and.
Moreover, we can assume that these three properties are also valid when enlargingtofor somesufficiently small.

Define

Similar to the proof of the sufficient condition in Section7.1,
take a smooth functiononwith,
satisfyingonandfor each.
Define, we have

for.

Applying the multiple Fourier series on,
we can write

where,,,
and

Combining,and the regularity estimate

for any, we have

Therefore, we can denote,
then

Obviously,

whereand.

Next, suppose that for each, we have two functionswith,.
Define the operatoras

Considering an arbitrary sequence.
Hereis the Lorentz sequence space defined as the set of all sequencessuch that

where the sequenceis the sequencerearranged in a decreasing order.

Define the operatoras

We rewrite

where

Then the argument forin the proof of Theorem1.6deduces thatandare NWO sequences.
Thus, applying (2.3) and the factto give

Recall that for an integral operatorwith the associated kernel,

then

By definition,

then we have

Combining the definition (7.7) of, we chooseandso that

where

andis a median value ofoverin the sense of

Note thatforand,
we have

and

Then

Furthermore,

Therefore, by duality, there exists a sequencewithsuch that

Hence, the proof of the necessary condition in Theorem1.6is complete.

SECTION: 8.Application: The Quantised Derivative in the two weight setting

Letbe a positive integer, and letbe the coordinates of.
For, we defineto be the derivative in the direction,.
Whenis not a smooth function thendenotes the distributional derivative of.
Let. We use-dimensional Euclidean gamma matrices,
which areself-adjoint complex matricessatisfying the anticommutation relation,, whereis the Kronecker delta.
The precise choice of matrices satisfying this relation is unimportant so we assume that a choice is fixed for the rest of this paper.
Using this choice of gamma matrices, we can define the-dimensional Dirac operator,.
This is a linear operator on the Hilbert spaceinitially defined with dense domain,
whereis the Schwartz space of functions on.
Taking the closure we obtain a self-adjoint operator which we also denote by.
We then define theofas the operatorvia the Borel functional calculus, i.e.,

Given,
denote bythe operator of pointwise multiplication byon the Hilbert space.
The operatoris a bounded linear operator on,
wheredenotes the identity operator on. The commutator,

denotes the quantised derivative of Alain Connes introduced in[4,].

Along with our main results in Theorems1.2,1.3, and1.6,
we have the analogy of[5,23,8,7]in the two weight setting.

Suppose,and set.
Suppose.
Thenif and only if.
Moreover,

where the implicit constants depends onand.

Acknowledgements:Lacey is supported in part by National Science Foundation DMS Grant.
Li, Wick and Wu are supported by ARC DP 220100285.
Wick is also supported by National Science Foundation Grants DMS # 2054863.
Wu is also supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China # 12201002, Anhui Natural Science Foundation of China # 2208085QA03 and Excellent University Research and Innovation Team in Anhui
Province #2024AH010002.

SECTION: References