SECTION: Inversion of the exponential X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors
A unique inversion of the exponential X-ray transform of some class of symmetric 2-tensor fields supported in a two-dimensional strictly convex set is presented. The approach to inversion is based on the Cauchy problem for a Beltrami-like equation associated with A-analytic maps.

SECTION: Introduction
The exponential X-ray transform arises in emission computed tomography. If attenuation of a medium is everywhere constant in a convex set containing the sources of emitted radiation,
then the attenuated X-ray transform reduces to a transform called the exponential X-ray transform. For the exponential X-ray transform of 0-tensors (functions), inversion formulas can be found in, identification problem in, and its range characterization in. Unlike the attenuated X-ray transform of planar 0- and 1-tensors which are fully injective, the attenuated X-ray transform of symmetric-tensor fields has large kernel, and a vast literature in tensor tomography concerns what part of the symmetric-tensor field is reconstructible from its X-ray transform, see.

The X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors occurs in the linearization of boundary rigidity problem. In this work, we consider a unique inversion of the exponential X-ray transform of some class symmetric 2-tensor supported in a strictly convex bounded subset in the Euclidean plane. We show that the exponential X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors in Theoremis invertible in the class of incompressible symmetric 2-tensors and in Theoremin class of trace-free symmetric 2-tensors. The recovery of the symmetric 2-tensor field from its exponential X-ray transform herein is recast as the recovery of a source term in a transport equation from boundary measurements. Our approach to reconstruction is based on the Cauchy problem for Beltrami-like equation associated with-analytic maps in the sense of Bukhgeim. The-analytic theory for non-attenuating medium was developed inand attenuating case was treated in. The Bukhgeim’s approach is based on expanding the solution to the transport equation into its Fourier series with respect to the velocityand studying the corresponding system of Fourier coefficients by some version of complex analysis. In section 2, we recall some basic properties of-analytic theory and in section 3, we provide the reconstruction methods.

For a real symmetric 2-tensor

and a real number(usually positive), the exponential-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensor fieldis defined by

whereis the scalar product in, andis a direction in the unit sphere

Throughout,is supported in the interior of a strictly convex domainwithsmooth boundaryforFor anyletdenote the distance fromin thedirection to the boundary, and distinguish the endpointsof the chordin the direction ofpassing throughby

The incoming (-) respectively outgoing (+) sub-manifolds of the unit bundle restricted to the boundary:

withbeing the outer unit normal at

The exponential-ray transform in () is realised as a function onby

We approach the reconstruction through its connection with the transport model as follows: The boundary value problem

has a unique solution in, and measurement from the exiting radiation on the boundary

SECTION: Preliminaries
Letbe a planar symmetrictensor field, letandbe integers,

is the divergence operator defined by

For symmetric 2-tensoras in (),

Letandbe the space of summable and bounded sequences respectively. For, we consider the Banach space:

where we use for brevity the notation

For, we consider the Cauchy-Riemann operators

A sequence valued mapinis called(in the sense of Bukhgeim), if

whereis the left shift operatorand.

Bukhgeim’s original theoryshows that solutions of (), satisfy a Cauchy-like integral formula,

whereis
the Bukhgeim-Cauchy operator acting on. We use the formula in, whereis defined component-wise forby

In addition to-analytic maps, consists of the one-to-one relation between solutionssatisfying

and the-analytic mapsatisfying () via a special function, seefor details.
The functionis defined as

whereis the counter-clockwise rotation ofby,is the Radon transform inof, andis the classical Hilbert transform where

The functionappeared first inand enjoys the crucial property of having vanishing negative Fourier modes yielding the expansions

Using the Fourier coefficients of, define the operatorscomponent-wise for each, by

We remark that in this work, the functionwill be taken as the constant attenuationdefined inside the convex set containing the support of the symmetric 2-tensor field

SECTION: inversion of the exponential X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors
For a real valued symmetric 2-tensor fieldin (), andwe have

where

From (), the transport equation(a) becomes

For, letbe the formal Fourier series representation of the solution of () in the angular variable. Sinceis real valued, the Fourier coefficientsoccurs in complex-conjugate pairs. For the derivativesin the spatial variable as in (), the advection operatorin () becomes. By identifying the Fourier coefficients of the same order, the non-positive Fourier coefficients

ofsatisfy:

whereare define in ().

Letbe the solution of the boundary value problem () in, and letbe the sequence of its non-positive Fourier coefficients.
Letbe the sequence valued map of its non-positive Fourier coefficients of the data

where

Since the symmetric 2-tensoris-regular with, then the anisotropic sourcebelong towith. By applying, we have. Moreover, by the Sobolev embedding,

thus,
and by, the sequence valued map.
We note from () that the shifted sequence valued mapsolves

Letby Lemma, the sequenceisanalytic. From the boundary dataand Proposition, we determines on the boundary

where the operatorscommute with the left translation.

From, we use the Bukhgeim-Cauchy Integral formula () to
construct the sequence valued mapinside

satisfyingBy Theoremthe constructed-analytic sequence valued mapinis inWe use convolution in Lemmato determine sequence, i.e

insidesatisfying (). ∎

The theorem below shows that exponential X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors is invertible for incompressible symmetric 2-tensors.

Sinceisregular with, andpositive real number, then from Lemma, the boundary measurementuniquely determines the Fourier coefficientsinsidesatisfying ().

By multiplying both sides of () by, we have

Sinceis incompressible i.ein (), then equation () becomes

Substituting () into equation () gives

From (), substituting forinto () yields,

Equation () together with the boundary value yields the boundary value problem

where the right hand side of () is known. By Theorem, the BVP () is uniquely solvable. Thusis uniquely recovered inby solving the Dirichlet BVP ().

Equation () together with the boundary value yields the boundary value problem

where the right hand side of () is known. We uniquely solve () as a Cauchy problem for the-equation with boundary value on

via the Cauchy-Pompieu formula:

From (), we determine inthe symmetric 2-tensor:

where from (), and (),

and the Fourier coefficients are obtained from equation (), () and ().
∎

Next, we show that the exponential X-ray transform of symmetric 2-tensors is invertible for trace-free symmetric 2-tensors.

Sinceisregular with, andpositive real number, then from Lemma, the boundary measurementuniquely determines the Fourier coefficientsinsidesatisfying ().

The 2-tensorbeing is trace-free implies, then from (), we have

thus

By applyingto (), yields

whereis real valued. From (), andbybeing trace-free, we have the equation

Substituting () into the real part of (), we have

Equation () together with the boundary value, yields the boundary value problem

where the right hand side of () is known. Thusis uniquely recovered inby solving the Dirichlet problem for the screened Poisson equation ().

From the Imaginary part of (), we have

From () and () we have

Equation () together the boundary value, yields the boundary value problem

where the right hand side of () is known. We uniquely solve () as a Cauchy problem for the-equation with boundary data on

via the Cauchy-Pompieu formula:

From (), the symmetric 2-tensor is given inby

and the Fourier coefficients are obtained from
equations (), (), and ().
∎

SECTION: 
The theorem below follows from the generalization of. Throughout, for repeated indices, we mean Einstein summation convention for sum from 1 to 2.

where the constant, and the constant

Letthen the real and imaginary parts of () satisfies the BVP

where

To show existence and uniqueness of solution, it suffices to show (see) thatis uniformly elliptic with zero kernel and zero co-kernel.We first prove the uniform ellipticity of. For, the symbol ofis given by

and the principal symbol ofis given by

Let, then

This proves thatis positive definite and thusis uniformly elliptic.

Next, for zero right hand side in (), we need to show that zero vector is the only solution .implies

Multiplying equation () byand () byand integrating overwherewe have

Adding equation () and (), we have

Sinceandit is easy to see thatis the only solution to (), hence Ker

Finally, we show that the co-kernel ofis also zero.Let. i.e we considersuch that

Sinceis self adjoint, it implies

Sinceis arbitrary, we have

From (), we have

From Green’s second formula, wherewe have

and integration by parts yields

From equation (), we have

Adding () and () we have

whereis the boundary operator defined by

From () and (), equation () becomes

Letbe an arbitrary vector on the, It is easy to see that there existssuch that

using this in (), we have that

From () and () we have the BVP

Equation () is exactly the equation for solving for the kernel of, therefore, repeating the same argument as before we conclude thatHence co-kernel= {}. Hence the boundary value problem BVP () is uniquely solvable.
∎

SECTION: References