SECTION: ChiSCAT: unsupervised learning of recurrent cellular micro-motion patterns from a chaotic speckle pattern

There is considerable evidence that action potentials are accompanied by ”intrinsic optical signals”, such as a nanometer-scale motion of the cell membrane.
Here we present ChiSCAT, a technically simple imaging scheme that detects such signals with interferometric sensitivity. ChiSCAT combines illumination by achaotic speckle pattern and interferometric scattering microscopy (iSCAT) to sensitively detect motion in any point and any direction. The technique features reflective high-NA illumination, common-path suppression of vibrations and a large field of view.
This approach maximizes sensitivity to motion, but does not produce a visually interpretable image. We show that unsupervised learning based on matched filtering and motif discovery can recover underlying motion patterns and detect action potentials.
We demonstrate these claims in an experiment on blebbistatin-paralyzed cardiomyocytes. ChiSCAT promises to even work in scattering tissue, including a living brain.

Department of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\altaffiliationThese authors contributed equally\alsoaffiliationDepartment of Life, Light, and Matter of the Interdisciplinary Faculty at Rostock University, 18059 Rostock, Germany\altaffiliationThese authors contributed equally

SECTION: 1Introduction

Literature data suggests that action potentials are accompanied by ”intrinsic optical signals”, tiny changes in the optical properties of a cell that can be detected by label-free optical imaging1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12. The most accepted mechanism is a nanometer-scale motion of the cell membrane7, occurring due to various factors, including the flexoelectric effect or voltage-induced changes in membrane tension13. Detecting action potentials by direct label-free observation of nanoscale cell motions in interferometric microscopy is highly promising, since it provides several unique advantages over dye-based voltage or calcium imaging: it does not suffer from photobleaching, which enables prolonged observation. Moreover, the illumination wavelength can be freely chosen and can be optimized to minimize cellular damage or to minimize optical scattering and hence
allow chronical imaging through multiple tissue layers, e.g. the cortex of the brain.

Intrinsic signals are a small fluctuation on a large background. Past studies have established that the average scale of membrane movement isnm14,7,15,11,12. In a suitable phase sensitive interferometric microscopy technique, this translates into an intensity change of

assuming a relative refractive index change between cell and medium(according to16) and a relative phase change of.
Intriguingly, such a signal should be easily detectable in a single shot. The quantum shot noise limit of interferometry is

wheredenotes the number of photons employed. AssumingmW of illumination power and an integration time ofms, matching the timescale of an action potential (AP), the quantum shot noise limit is on the order of, and the expected signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is around 100.

However, existing experiments on label-free AP detection still fall short of this limit. Published results either have been obtained on non-mammalian large axons and nerves4, had to resort to invasive techniques like atomic force microscopy17or plasmon imaging18, or to spike-triggered averaging of multiple APs to reveal the signal with SNR11,12,10.

Presumably, a major reason is that increasing the SNR is more challenging than merely raising the excitation power. In transmission microscopy, the full-well capacity of the imaging camera sets a limit for excitation power at the level of nanowatts. This can be overcome by a reflective illumination scheme, promising a great gain in sensitivity12. However, existing reflective schemes either restrict acquisition to a single diffraction-limited plane19,20, reducing the signal, or merely produce an unspecific speckle pattern, which cannot be easily interpreted21: the reflected beam contains interfering signals from all depth levels inside the cell, which leads to chaotic speckle-like appearance.

Here, we break this limitation. We present an unsupervised learning scheme to recover AP signals from a speckle pattern, withouta prioriknowledge of the timing of the action potentials or the spatial pattern of motion triggered during an AP. Moreover, we intentionally maximize the chaotic nature of the image by illuminating the specimen with a speckle pattern. This creates a random 3D light field in the cell, making the technique sensitive not just to the motion in height, but also to motion in X-Y plane, achieving interferometric sensitivity to motion in any illuminated voxel. In other words, the observed image is a ”fingerprint” of the cell geometry and exact volume distribution of intracellular scatterers.

Since ChiSCAT is not based on a visually interpretably image, it paves the way to detecting action potentials even in scattering tissue, including the living brain: signal passing through multiple layers of scatterers will change, but it’s nature of a cell shape ”fingerprint” will be conserved.

SECTION: 2Setup

Our setup (Fig.1A) is based on widefield interferometric scattering microscopy (iSCAT). We illuminate the cell with coherent light. The resulting image is an interference of light scattered by the cell and light scattered at the cover slide-immersion medium (water) interface, providing common-path suppression of vibrations in the setup. Light scattered in random parts of the cell interferes, forming a speckle signal. In iSCAT, this speckle background is usually carefully suppressed, e.g. to highlight motion of a single nanoparticle22.
ChiSCAT takes an opposite approach. In order to generate a motion fingerprint of the entire cell, we maximize the speckle background by employing speckle illumination (Fig.1A+B). This is achieved by a holographic diffusor in the excitation path. Importantly, speckle illumination uses the full numerical aperture of the microscope. Both illumination and detection have a high numerical aperture, yielding a higher resolution than classical widefield iSCAT or quantitative phase imaging, which employ a parallel, i.e. low-NA, excitation beam. The setup features a correlative path for fluorescence voltage imaging (Fig.1A+C), which is only needed as a ground-truth reference to benchmark the processing algorithms. We employ this setup to perform experiments on human induced pluripotent stem cells derived cardiomyocytes, with mechanical contraction has been disabled by the myosin-inhibitor blebbistatin. Since this inhibition might not be perfect, these cells can potentially exhibit larger micromotion in response to an AP than neurons. Most likely, the motion is larger than few nanometers, but still significantly below the optical diffraction limit (240 nm).

In the ChiSCAT channel we expect a signal as sketched in Figure1D. It consists of three components: a static speckle background created mainly by light scattered from the coverslide, a speckle pattern which is modulated by the time-dependent and repeating AP signal, and noise which for sufficiently strong illumination is dominated by photon shot noise.

Mathematically, the superposition of two of these three components in the camera plane can be modeled as a complex (phasor) electric fields

Here,refers to light reflected from the cover slide and static parts of the cell, andto light scattered from cellular components varying along the AP, e.g. a vibrating plasma membrane.
All fieldsare random speckle fields in the spatial coordinatesand, and can depend on time ().
The intensity recorded by the camera is then given by

Here, a noise termhas been added. Crucially, the AP signal can be factorized as follows

wheredenotes action potential amplitude, likely following a similar time trace as the trans-membrane voltage. In a simplified picture, wheneverspikes, a characteristic patternappears in the ChiSCAT recording.

The ChiSCAT recording is interferometrically sensitive to motion, and meaningful images can be reconstructed from the chaotic speckle pattern by data processing. As a simple example, temporal band-pass filtering of the video stream reveals an easily recognizable image of individual cells. Fluctuations at high (Hz) frequencies are markedly reduced in or around the nucleus, possibly due to restricted diffusion in the nucleus and reticulum, confirming recent observations by refractive index tomography23. ChiSCAT is depth-selective. The signal observed in a region of interest arises mainly from a range of depths comparable to the size to the region, because ChiSCAT, in contrast to existing schemes24,21employs high-NA illumination. We demonstrate this by measuring the suppression of light scattered from a movable out-of-focus plane (Fig.2, F + G).

SECTION: 3Data processing

SECTION: 3.1Preliminary analysis

SECTION: 3.2Supervised learning

We now turn to the main goal of this work: label-free detection of action potentials from a visually non-interpretable ChiSCAT recording. In mathematical terms, the goal is finding, the time-varying amplitude of AP activity with maximum signal-to-noise ratio.

It is known that the optimal linear solution to this problem is matched filtering25. This scheme provides an estimateofby convolving the signal (in our case a ChiSCAT movie) with a time-reversed elementary template

In our case,can be thought of as a noise-free ChiSCAT movie of a perfect single action potential. Crucially, neithernoris known in advance.

One way to obtainis supervised learning by spike-triggered averaging of the ChiSCAT signal, which we demonstrate in Figure3. We first extract a fluorescence trace by spatially averaging the fluorescence movie. Fluorescence peaks, corresponding to individual APs, are detected and used to extract slices from the ChiSCAT movie (only training subset), which are then averaged to produce an estimation of. The original speckle movie is then convolved with this extracted matched filter to produce the recovered signal.

As visible from Figure3, this approach is indeed able to recover individual APs, however it suffers from two problems: firstly, it requires a known ground truth signal for training (fluorescence in our case), which undermines the concept of label-free microscopy. Secondly, this approach is only optimal under assumption of static background (static specklein the Figure1, D) and a perfectly repeating dynamic pattern, while in reality both slowly drift on a scale of 2-3 seconds due to slow motion of the cell. This makes the spike-triggered average incoherent and reduces the signal. In an experiment on 64 regions of cells, supervised learning was successful in 36% of the regions.

SECTION: 3.3Unsupervised learning

The most central discovery of this work is an unsupervised learning scheme that can efficiently recover repeating patterns of motion without requiring ground truth information. It instead exploits thea prioriinformation that APs are recurring events and that the approximate temporal amplitude patternof an AP is known.

The full algorithm is visualized in the Figure4(A). It is based on a combination of temporal matched filtering and motif discovery. The algorithm begins by convolving the raw ChiSCAT movie along the time axis with a 1D model of the signal. For simplicity, a zero-mean Gaussian function was chosen, the widthof which was adapted to the typical timescale of an AP.

The resulting convolved movie was subsequently cropped to a region of interest (ROI), identified from pixels with high temporal variability. This is accomplished by computing the standard deviation along the time axis, followed by Gaussian smoothing and thresholding.

We then search for recurring patterns in the resulting movie by calculating the dot product between every possible pair of frames, forming a Gramian matrix. A recurring events, i.e. a set of two similar frames occurring some time apart, will produce an off-diagonal peak in this matrix because the frames are strongly correlated with each other, whereas each of them is uncorrelated with the noise. This approach to identifying recurring events is reminiscent of a recurrence plot26, only using a dot product rather than a difference as a metric for similarity. APs can be detected as off-diagonal peaks of the Gramian matrix, and a column or row crossing one of the peaks is a time trace of AP activity.

Due to the slow fluctuations of the cell, the cross-correlation between two frames both containing an AP decreases with increasing temporal distance between them, and vanishes for timescales larger than few seconds. To reconstruct a non-decaying AP trace over the ChiSCAT movie, we use a rank-one approximation, that is we find a vector, such that its outer product with itselfapproximates the Gramian matrix.
One can imagine this as finding a checkerboard pattern in the matrix which best approximates the experimentally observed Gramian.
Technically, this is achieved by finding the largest eigenvector of the Gramian. Before the eigendecomposition, the diagonal of the Gramian matrix is zeroed out to reduce the influence of random non-recurrent events. Importantly, the low-rank approximation aggregates information from multiple action potentials and hence improves the signal-to-noise ratio over what could be obtained in a single correlation of one pair of frames.

Applying the algorithm to a set of cell regions (Fig.4B), we find that it indeed recovers action potentials, even for regions where supervised learning has failed. Overall, detection succeeds in 71% of the regions (Fig.4C), which is a marked improvement over supervised detection.

We can confirm this improvement by a simple numerical model (Fig.4D).
It models the framesof the speckle movie as random Gaussian noise with an additional fixed zero-mean random patternperiodically superimposed onto some selected frames to model the signal. This effectively models action potentials as a train of delta functions in time.
From this synthetic dataset we compute three time traces: 1) The time series, effectively modeling spatial matched filtering with a perfect template. 2) The time series, whereis a signal frame containing both the signal patternand Gaussian noise, effectively modeling a single column or row of the Gramian matrix in Fig.4. 3) The time series obtained from the full ChiSCAT algorithm, i.e. all steps of Fig.4A. For all series, we compare the height of a signal peak with the rms noise of a signal-free region.
As expected, spatial matched filtering performs best, and can be fully matched by the other schemes only if a signal-to-noise ratio larger than one is already obtained in a single-pixel time trace. Unsupervised detection correlates the movie with a signal frame instead of the perfect pattern. For weaker signals, this signal frame is dominated by noise, which leads to inferior performance. A simple analytical estimate (SI) suggests that this overhead is a factor ofin SNR, whereis the number of pixels in a frame. Due to the slow () scaling, this overhead is not excessive, reducing the SNR by one order of magnitude for apixel movie. The full ChiSCAT algorithm recovers for part of this loss, because it searches for an extended pattern of cross-peaks in the Gramian matrix and hence aggregates information from multiple action potentials. Over a wide range of single-pixel signal-to-noise ratios, the resulting performance approaches matched filtering.

SECTION: 4Results and discussion

In summary, we have demonstrated an unsupervised learning algorithm that can recover action potentials from a microscopy movie, even from a chaotic speckle pattern, withouta prioriinformation on the timing and the exact spatial pattern of an AP. With this tool at hand, we detect action potentials with interferometric sensitivity in an experimentally simple microscopy scheme. Combining iSCAT microscopy with speckle illumination, makes it interferometrically sensitive to motion. It harnesses the higher sensitivity that can be achieved in reflective schemes and features common-path rejection of vibrations and a freely tunable illumination wavelength.

Our results also demonstrate that living cells are interferometrically stable for at least a few seconds and that APs repeating within this time indeed trigger the same interferometric pattern. This opens a window where algorithms can be devised to search for repeating signals rather than a known pattern.

The signal to noise ratio of our algorithm is inferior to algorithms searching for a known spatial pattern, and scales as, i.e. for a realistic setup havingpixels ChiSCAT will be 10 times less sensitive than matched filtering. The theory predicts that lowering the number of pixels will improve the SNR, achieving optimality in the limiting case of. However, this would make distinguishing between an AP signal and a random fluctuations impossible, since both of them will exhibit exactly same spatial pattern (consisting of 1 pixel). This trade-off leads to the existence of an optimal number of pixels for the given experiment, which will need more investigation in future work.

Recovery of signal with ChiSCAT algorithm depends not only on the number of pixels, but also on the density of spikes: the low rank approximation minimizes the sum of squares of residuals, i.e. the algorithm will converge to a component which dominates the Gramian matrix. Increasing the number of spikes increases the number of off-diagonal peaks in the Gramian matrix quadratically, helping the algorithm to recover the real AP signal. Thus, the theory predicts that the ChiSCAT algorithm can recover even weaker signals if cells spike more often, e.g. in primary neurons.

While our demonstration is based on a speckle-based variant of iSCAT microscopy, the algorithm is agnostic against the imaging scheme employed, and could also operate on visually interpretable imaging datasets obtained by e.g. quantitative phase microscopy, ROCS, refractive index tomography or coherence tomography21,27,28,29.
Importantly, it could identify any repeating motion correlating with action potentials, not only motion of the plasma membrane. It could thus discover additional intrinsic signals, such as motion of organelles in response to Ca release, or a lateral motion in the axoplasm which is predicted by a non-standard theory of action potentials30.
Still, it is notable that our algorithm can even operate on speckle patterns. This paves the way to detecting action potentials even in scattering tissue, including the living brain.

SECTION: 5Methods

All the experiments have been performed with custom-built microscope (see SI for details). The commercially available iPS cell line SC950A-1 (Biocat) was cultivated in StemMACS iPS-Brew (Miltenyi Biotech). Once the cells had reached 80% confluence, they were split as aggregates using ReLeSR (Stemcell technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and seeded at a cell density of 20,000 cells/cm2.
For the selection of cardiomyocytes, clones with theMHC promoter31and for the selection of pacemaker cells, double transfected clones with TBX3 andMHC promoter32were generated. Four days before the start of differentiation, 20000 cells/cm2 were seeded into one well of a 6 well plate in StemMACS iPS-Brew. Differentiation protocol was applied. After end of differentiation, cells were dissociated using the Multi Tissues Dissociation Kit 3 (Miltenyi Biotech) and seeded as single cells for further analyses. See SI for detailed information about methods.

The authors wish to thank Marten Möller for expert technical assistance.
This work has been supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) SFB 1477 “LightMatter Interactions at Interfaces,” Project No. 441234705. S.K., C.R. and R.D. received funding from the EU Structural Fund (ESF/14- BM-A55-0024/18) and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (16KN083635). In addition, S.K. is supported by the DFG (VA1797/1-1). Moreover, R.D. is supported by the DFG (DA1296/6-1 and GRK 2901 Sylobio), the DAMP foundation, the German Heart Foundation (F/01/12), the BMBF (VIP+00240) and the BMEL (FKZ: 281A819B21).

Optical setup description, details about numerical and analytical estimation of ChiSCAT algorithm performance.

SECTION: References