SECTION: A class of Taub-NUT-scalar metrics via Ehlers transformations

We derive a class of Taub-NUT metrics in the presence of a scalar field (TNS) by using Ernst equations and potential, as well as using Ehlers transformations on the exact solutions that was recently introduced in[1,2]. Furthermore, we investigate the effective potential, geodesics, topological charge, quasinormal modes (QNMs) and the deflection angle of light in a gravitational lensing for the obtained class of TNS metrics. We also use conformal transformations to generate a new class of exact solutions of the Einstein-conformal-scalar theory by using the obtained TNS solutions as seed metrics. Finally we compare QNMs of the class of exact solutions.

SECTION: 1Introduction

The singularities of general relativity are divided into two categories, black holes and naked singularities, depending on whether they are hidden in an event horizon or not. Although cosmic censorship conjecture (CCC)[3,4]suggest that wherever there is a singularity in curved space-time, this singularity is covered by a special hypersurface called the event horizon, however, this issue has not been proved so far. While the theoretical properties of black holes have been extensively studied, the naked singularity solutions in general relativity that arise from dynamical collapse studies are still relatively poorly understood. The study of naked singularities can be useful in many ways. For example, the-metric (Zipoy-Voorhees metric)[5,6,7,8], is a vacuum solution of Einstein’s field equations and includes a naked singularity. It has been suggested in[9,10]that the-metric describes many features of sgr-at the center of our galaxy including the deviation from the perfect spherical state and its shadow. For more studies on the gamma metric, see Refs.[11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. Also, naked singularities form a region with strong gravity and provide excellent laboratories to study quantum gravity and may have interesting astrophysical effects at high energies in the universe[23]. For these reasons, we have strong motivation to derive new exact solutions of the Einsteins equations.

Another spacetime that has a naked singularity is the Fisher-Janis-Newman-Winicour (FJNW) metric[24,25,26]. The FJNW metric is an asymptotically flat and static spacetime in the presence of a scalar field. So far, many studies have been done on the FJNW metric, for example see[27,28,29,30]and references therein. Recently, in[1], a class of three-parameter metrics in the presence of a scalar field have been introduced, which are transformed into FJNW and-metrics at certain values of the parameters. In[2], rotating form of the class of three parameter metrics is introduced. In this paper, we are going to derive a class of Taub-NUT metrics in the presence of a scalar field. In the following, we briefly describe the history of the emergence of gravomagnetic monopole in Einstein’s field equations. A spacetime with gravomagnetic monopole, known as Taub-NUT metric, was first introduced by Taub in 1951 as a homogeneous vacuum cosmological model[31], and in 1963, Newman, Unti and Tamburino (NUT) derived this metric as a generalization of Schwarzschild spacetime[32,33]. Although the physical interpretation of this metric is very complex and has unique and strange features, it should be taken seriously as one of the solutions to Einstein’s field equations. Until now, various physical interpretations have been suggested for Taub-NUT metric, for example, the explanations of Misner[34,35]and Bonnor[36]can be mentioned. Misner defined periodic time coordinates to interpret Taub-NUT metric and eliminate the string-like defect that is physically unfamiliar and confusing. Bonnor described the Taub-NUT metric as a rotating massless rod. The model presented by him has two problems, firstly, it is not really massless, and secondly, there is an infinite angular momentum in his description, while the angular momentum of the Taub-NUT metric is zero[37,38]. Manko and Ruiz[38]described the NUT solution as the exterior field of two semi-infinite sources with negative mass that rotate in opposite direction and are attached to the poles of a finite static rod with positive mass. So far, many studies have been done on NUT and Taub-NUT metrics, for example, see[39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48].

To obtain a class of Taub-NUT metrics in the presence of a scalar field, we use three different methods. In the first one, we use the Ernst method to solve Einstein equations[49,50]. Depending on the space-time symmetries, Ernst’s potential can be defined in different forms. For example, the authors in[2]have used a special type of Ernst potential to obtain a class of rotating metrics in the presence of a scalar field. In[51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59], some methods to derive Ernst potentials for different space-time symmetries are described in detail.

Another interesting way to obtain TNS metrics is to use the Ehlers transformations[60,61,62]. The Ehlers transformations are obtained according to the symmetry of Ernest equations. By using Ehlers transformations, it is possible to add the NUT parameter[63,64]to axially symmetric metrics. Also, it is proved that the Ehlers transformations can be used for the Einstein-Hilbert action coupled with the scalar fields[65,66]. We consider this fact and derive a new class of Taub-NUT-scalar metrics by using Ehlers transformation. We show that the results obtained by using either Ernst method or Ehlers transformations are the same. To see some examples of the applications of Ehlers transformations , see Refs.[67,68,69].

After obtaining a class of TNS metrics, following the Duran’s theory[70,71,72], a topological current and charge for light rings is obtained for an arbitrary member of the new class of Taub-NUT metrics and it is proved that there is at least one light ring whose topological number is -1. By using conformal transformations[73]and the new class of Taub-NUT metrics in the presence of a scalar field, we obtain a new class of exact solutions of the Einstein-conformal-scalar theory. The conformal transformations used here include a redefinition of the massless scalar field and a conformal rescaling of the metric. Additionally, we investigated the curvature invariants, singularities, quasinormal modes (QNMs) and gravitational lensing for the TNS class of metrics.

This article is organized as follows. In Sec.2, we go through a quick preliminary review of the new class of metrics in the presence of a massless scalar field. Then, in Sec.3.2, we obtain the class of TNS metrics by using three different methods i.e. by introducing the Ernst potential and two different algorithms for Ehlers transformations. Then, we investigate various properties of the TNS metric, such as geodesics, effective potential, and topological charge. In Sec.4, we consider the Bekenstein approach to find the proper conformal transformation to derive a new class of exact solutions of the Einstein-conformal-scalar theory that are counterpart of the class of three parameter static metrics. Thereafter, in Sec.5, we propose the conformal transformation of the class of TNS metrics, and obtain another new class of Taub-NUT metrics related to the Einstein-conformal-scalar theory. We also investigate the geodesics and the effective potential. Finally, in Sec.6, we derive the QNMs of TNS and conformal TNS (CTNS) metrics using the light ring method. In Sec.7, the deflection angle of light due to gravitational lensing is investigated for TNS metrics. Sec.CONCLUSIONis devoted to the conclusions.

SECTION: 2A CLASS OF METRICS IN THE PRESENCE OF A MASSLESS SCALAR FIELD

Recently, a class of exact solutions of Einstein’s equations and their rotating forms were introduced in[1,2]. The class of static solutions depends on three parameters, i.e., mass and two other free parameters and one may obtain the well-known-metric (Zipoy-Voorhees metric) and the FJNW metric at some values of the parameters. In the following, we will consider the Einstein-Hilbert action () in the presence of a massless scalar field

where,, andare the Ricci scalar, determinant of metric, and scalar field, respectively. By varying the above action with respect to the metric tensorand the massless scalar field, respectively, the equations of motion will be obtained as follows

Now, we consider the following exact solutions of the Einstein’s equations that recently was obtained in[1]

where the functionsandare given as below

The metric in (4) depends on three independent parameters. The parameters are mass, and three other parameters,, andthat only two of them are independent as we have a constraint, i.e.. The expression for the scalar fieldcan be written as

Assuming that the scalar field is a real function, the following conditions on the parametersandcan be obtained

Overall, this three parameter solution is important. Choosing the parameters asand, the metric represents the-metric, and by choosingwill give us the FJNW metric. We will define the conformal transformation of metric (4) and hence derive a new exact solution for the Einstein-conformal-scalar theory in section4by using the scalar field (7). Various futures of the class of metrics in the presence of a scalar field have been investigated in[1,2].

SECTION: 3TAUB-NUT-SCALAR METRICS

In this section, we intend to introduce a class of Taub-NUT metrics in the presence of a scalar field. To derive the class of metrics, we use three methods, the first method is to solve the Einstein field equations by directly introducing the Ernst potential, and then, we use Ehlers transformations by two approaches.

SECTION: 3.1TAUB-NUT-SCALAR METRICS VIA ERNST POTENTIAL

For the calculations related to this section, we first consider the Lewis-Weyl-Papapetrou (LWP) metrics in thecoordinates

where sigma is a positive parameter and,andare functions ofand. Next, our goal is to find the form of these functions. First, according to Eq. (2) and metric (9), we have

Now we define a functionas follows

Using the definition (12), we rewrite Eq. (10) in the following form

whereis defined as follows

Using Eqs. (12) and (14), we write the following relation for

Using Eq. (2) and metric (9), we calculateandand after simplifying and using Eq. (12) we get the following equation

Using Eq. (2), metric (9), Eq. (12) and, we have

Now using the following coordinate transformations

We can rewrite Eqs. (12), (16) and (17) in thecoordinates as follows

Also, metric (9) in thecoordinates is written as follows

By defining the complex Ernst potentialas follows

We can represent Eqs. (13) and (15) with the following Ernst equation

whereis the complex conjugate ofandandare defined as follows

The following Ernst potential function can explain our stationary solution. The following Ernst potential can also be used to obtain the Taub-NUT metric. We can use the same Ernst potential here since the scalar field does not affect the Ernst equation and therefore the Ernst potential can be written as

whereis the NUT parameter andis defined as follows

Using Eqs. (19), (23), (26) and (27), we obtain,andas follows

It is clear that derivative of Eq. (20) with respect to, is equal to derivative of Eq. (21) with respect to. By usingwe obtain the following differential equation

Using Eq. (3) and metric (22), we obtain the coefficients ofandas follows

Now by putting Eqs. (19), (28), (29) and (30) into Eqs. (20) and (21) and integrating the obtained relations, we have

Finally, using the following coordinate transformation

and using Eqs. (28) and (31), we derive the final form of the Taub-NUT-scalar metric as follows