SECTION: Unsupervised Learning for Gain-Phase ImpairmentCalibration in ISAC Systems††thanks:This work was supported, in part, by a grant from the Chalmers AI Research Center Consortium (CHAIR), by the National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF) (grant FUS21-0004, SAICOM), Hexa-X-II, part of the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 101095759, and Swedish Research Council (VR grant 2022-03007). The work of C. Häger was also supported by the Swedish Research Council under grant no. 2020-04718. The work of L. Le Magoarou is supported by the French national research agency (grant ANR-23-CE25-0013)

GPI affect both communication and sensing in 6G integrated sensing and communication (ISAC).
We study the effect ofgain-phase impairmentsin a single-input, multiple-output orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing ISAC system and develop a model-based unsupervised learning approach to simultaneously (i) estimate the gain-phase errors and (ii) localize sensing targets.
The proposed method is based on the optimal maximum a-posteriori ratio test for a single target. Results show that the proposed approach can effectively estimate the gain-phase errors and yield similar position estimation performance as the case when the impairments are fully known.

SECTION: IIntroduction

ISAC is considered a key enabler of the6th generation wireless systems(6G)[1], combining sensing and communication functions in a single device, thereby providing sensing capabilities to communication systems, while also improving wireless channel usage efficiency and system performance[2].
Signal processing in ISAC has been largely driven by model-based algorithms, which offer performance guarantees, explainability, and predictable computational complexity[3,4,5,6,7].
However, the higher carrier frequencies expected in 6G and the integration of sensing in communication networks increase the likelihood of hardware impairments such as antenna distortions, phase noise, and sampling jitter[8,9]. These hardware impairments cause a model mismatch in the model-based algorithms and thus degrade their performance.

DL has been successfully applied to mitigate hardware impairments inintegrated sensing and communication(ISAC)[10,11,12,13], but it suffers from lack of interpretability. In contrast,model-based machine learning(MB-ML) provides interpretable solutions, by parameterizing standard model-based algorithms, enhancing their adaptability to mismatched models while offering performance guarantees[14].
MB-ML has been applied in communications[15,16,17,18], sensing[19,20,21], and ISAC scenarios[22].
Hardware impairment mitigation solutions (e.g.,[20,21,22]) rely onsupervised learning(SL), which involves the difficult or time-consuming process of acquiring the ground-truth position of the objects in the environment.\AcUL avoids labeled data and has been applied for ISAC inter-antenna spacing impairment mitigation in[23], though still requiring a small labeled dataset to fully compensate for the impairments.

In this paper, we develop an UL approach to jointly compensate for antennaGPIsand estimate target locations, under the MB-ML framework. As a proof-of-concept, we focus on a simple monostaticsingle-input multiple-output(SIMO) radar performing single-target detection and position estimation based onorthogonal frequency-division multiplexing(OFDM) signals (see Fig.1).GPImitigation is an important problem, with model-based[24,25,26],deep learning(DL)[27,28], and MB-ML solutions[17,18]. However,[24,25]required at least a transmitter at a known angle to calibrate the antenna array and[26]assumed a known model of thechannel state information(CSI), which does not apply to our case as theCSIcontains the target position to be estimated.
In[27], only angle estimation was performed and[28]required a transmitter at a known position for calibration. Moreover,[27,28]require labeled data to train.
Finally, although[17,18]proposed MB-ML UL approaches to compensate for GPI, they considered a pure communication system and CSI estimation without localization of the user.

SECTION: IISystem Model

We consider a monostaticSIMO-OFDMISAC transceiver equipped with a single-antennatransmit(TX) and areceive(RX)uniform linear array(ULA) ofelements. The element spacing of the RX ULA is. TheOFDMsignal has a symbol duration of, whereis thecyclic prefix(CP) and andis the elementary symbol duration.
The complex baseband OFDM transmit signal withsubcarriers and a subcarrier spacingis[29,30]

whereis the complex transmitted symbol in the-th subcarrier.
Considering the presence of a stationary point-target in the far-field, the noise-free received baseband signal at the-th RX element is[31]

whereis the complex channel gain,is the total round-trip delay of the target,is theangle-of-arrival(AOA), andis the array steering vector with

for carrier wavelength.
Following the standard OFDM assumption, the CP is taken to be larger than the round-trip delay of the furthermost target, i.e.,.
Samplingatfor(i.e., after CP removal), we obtain the discrete-time signal

where the known phase shiftis absorbed into.
Taking the-point DFT ofyields the frequency-domain baseband signal as

with. Aggregating over antenna elements and subcarriers, the signal in (4) can be expressed as

whereis the transmit symbol vector anddenotes the Hadamard product.

Adding noise at the receiver side and considering the random presence of a target in the environment yields the final model111The communication receiver is not affected byGPIunder the consideredSIMOmodel. For this reason and due to space limitations, the communication performance is not evaluated in this paper.

wheredenotes the absence or presence of a target andrepresentsadditive white Gaussian noise(AWGN) following, withthe vectorization operation,the all-zeros vector andthe identity matrix. The goal of the sensing receiver is to detect the presence of the target and estimate its position based on.

When the ULA elements are affected byGPIs, the actual steering vector of the ULA is, whereis a vector that contains theGPIsof all antenna elements. We consider thatso that under impairments the transmitter energy is preserved, i.e.,. The model in (7) underGPIsbecomes

The goal of the receiver is now to operate under unknown.

SECTION: IIIProposed Method

In the following, we detail the considered baseline to perform target detection and position estimation as well as the proposed unsupervised MB-ML approach to compensate for theGPIs.

SECTION: III-ABaseline

We assume that the baseline operates under a fixed, which may not coincide with the trueGPIs.
In order to detect the target presence and estimate its position, we resort to themaximum a-posteriori ratio test(MAPRT) detector[32], which generalizes the generalized likelihood ratio test detector[33]to the case with random parameters and thus can take into account prior information on,and. We assume that the complex channel gain follows a normal distribution asand the target angle and range are confined to an a priori known region, i.e.,,. Moreover, we assume that. For a fixed, the MAPRT then yields the following optimal test:

where,,denotes the conjugate transpose operation,denotes the conjugate operation,denotes the absolute value, andis a threshold that controls the probabilities of detection and false alarm. Details about the derivation of the MAPRT can be found in AppendixA. The angle and delay of the target are obtained as follows:

When the assumedmatches the actual GPIs, the baseline in (9), (10) is optimal and it represents a lower bound on the performance, as it will be shown in Sec.IV.

SECTION: III-BProposedunsupervised learning(UL)MB-MLMethod

We base our approach on the baseline of Sec.III-A.
In particular, we compute theangle-delaymap as

whereis the estimate of theGPIs,is the all-ones vector, and

We evaluate the angle-delay map on a uniformly sampled 2D grid, withandthe number of angle and delay points, respectively.
From the angle-delay map, we propose two different unsupervised loss functions to learn theGPIs.

where the expectation is taken with respect to random realizations of, andin (8).
UnknownGPIsreduce the magnitude of the angle-delay map, since computation of the angle-delay map involves, which is only maximized if. Thus, we expect that by minimizing (14), our proposed algorithm converges to the true impairments. Details about how the impairments affect the angle-delay map will be shown in Sec.IV.

wheredenotes the Frobenius norm and

is the reconstructed observation from the channel gain, angle, and target delay estimations. The expression foris derived in AppendixA.222The estimation ofassumes knowledge of, which is related to thesignal-to-noise ratio(SNR). In this work we assume perfect knowledge of, but we refer the reader to[34,35]for SNR estimation methods.The motivation behind (15) is that the observationis affected by the trueGPIs, while we reconstruct the observationin (16) using the estimated impairments. Our hypothesis is that by minimizing the difference between the received observation and the reconstructed signal, the learned impairments converge to the true impairments. Although the computation ofandin (10) involves a nondifferentiable operation, it is possible to compute the gradient of the loss in (15) with respect to, which was already observed in an equivalent approach in[17].

In Algorithm1, we summarize the proposed unsupervised MB-ML algorithm to learn theGPIs. The distributions of the random variables are highlighted in TableI. We initialize the algorithm with the ideal gain-phase coefficients, i.e.,.
Once we have learned the gain-phase errors according to Algorithm1, we compute the same operations as the baseline in (9), (10) for inference, where the steering vectoris replaced by the steering vector with the learned impairments.

SECTION: IVResults

In this section, we detail the considered simulation parameters and present the sensing results333The code to reproduce all simulation results will be available ingithub.com/josemateosramos/UL_gain_phase_ISACafter the peer-review process.to assess the effectiveness of the proposed learning approach.

SECTION: IV-ASimulation Parameters

In TableIthe simulation parameters are outlined, where we consider that the communication symbolsare randomly drawn from aquadrature phase-shift keying(QPSK) constellation anddenotes the phase of a complex value. TheSNRis. The magnitude and phase of theGPIsare drawn from the distributions detailed in[36]. To evaluate the objective function to maximize in (9) and (10), we perform a uniformly 2D grid search over angles and delays, similarly to (11). During training, we leverage the Adam optimizer[37].

SECTION: IV-BImpact ofGPIs

To understand how ignoring theGPIsaffects the sensing performance, we plot in Fig.2the angle-delay maps under full knowledge of theGPIs, i.e.,(left) and assuming no impairments, i.e.,(right). The channel model in (8) includes an impairment realization. It is observed that disregardingGPIschanges the position of the maximum of the angle-delay map, which affects the test in (10).
Furthermore, the angle-delay maps in Fig.2are normalized with respect to the maximum of the angle-delay map under full knowledge ofGPIs(left), which implies that ignoring theGPIsalso decreases the maximum magnitude of the angle-delay map compared to full knowledge ofGPIs(as commented in Sec.III-B).

SECTION: IV-CSensing Results

In Fig.3, we show the testing sensing results, where we compare: (i) the baseline of Sec.III-Awhenmatches the true impairments (in blue), (ii) the baseline with(in black), and (iii) the proposed method of Sec.III-Bwith the learned impairments, using the loss in (14) (in green) and the loss in (15) (in red). The results in Fig3are averaged over 100 realizations of theGPIs.
The results in Fig.3indicate that the proposed unsupervised learning approach can converge to aGPIvector similar to the true impairments of the ULA and obtain similar performance as the case where the impairments are fully known. This confirms the hypothesis of Sec.III-Babout the effectiveness of the proposed loss functions.
Moreover, the performance of the algorithm using the losses (14) and (15) is very similar, which can be explained following the derivation of AppendixA. The loss in (15) resembles the objective to minimize in (20) and the loss in (14) is similar to (25). Both (20) and (25) are derived from the same MAPRT objective in (18). The results in Fig.3indicate that minimizing (14) or (15) is equivalent. The advantage of (14) is that is does not require knowledge of the SNR, while (15) can be more easily generalized to multiple targets and embedded in iterative algorithms like the orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm[38].

[width=0.48mode=buildnew]figures/results_roc

SECTION: VConclusions

In this work, we have proposed a model-based unsupervised learning approach to account forGPIsin the RX ULA of an ISAC system. We have based our proposed approach on the optimal MAPRT, developing a differentiable approach that allows for backpropagation, and proposing two unsupervised loss functions that require no labeled data. Our results have shown that the proposed approach can effectively compensate for the effect of gain-phase errors in the RX ULA, yielding target detection and position estimation performances similar to the case where the impairments are fully known. Natural extensions include considering multiple targets and theGPIunder a MIMO system.

SECTION: Appendix ADerivation of MAPRT

This appendix details the derivation of the MAPRT in Sec.III-Afor single-target detection and position estimation.
Since the target in the far-field is randomly present, we can formulate the target detection problem as a binary hypothesis testing problem:

where.

Note that the transmitted communication symbolsare known for the sensing receiver in the considered monostatic setup. Consideringa random unknown, the MAPRT is

Applying the Bayes’ theorem to (18) yields

Assuming,and taking the logarithm in (19), we obtain444We considerfor convenience.

whereand. The optimalfor a givenin (20) is

Manipulating the expression in (20) and plugging (21) yields

Given the definition of, we have that

Plugging (23) and (24) into (22) yields

where. Once we have obtained the estimated, we can plug the estimations in (21).

SECTION: References