SECTION: On matrix Lax representations and
constructions of Miura-type transformations for differential-difference equations
This paper is part of a research project on relations between
differential-difference matrix Lax representations (MLRs) with the action of gauge transformations
and discrete Miura-type transformations (MTs)
for (nonlinear) integrable differential-difference equations.

The paper addresses the following problem:

when and how can one eliminate some shifts
of dependent variables from the discrete (difference) part of an MLR by means of
gauge transformations?

Using results on this problem, we present applications to constructing new MLRs
and new integrable equations connected by new MTs to known equations.

In particular, we obtain results of this kind for equations connected to the following ones:

The two-component Belov–Chaltikian lattice.

The equation (introduced by G. Marí Beffa and Jing Ping Wang)
which describes the evolution induced on invariants by an invariant evolution of planar polygons.

An equation from [S. Igonin, arXiv:2405.08579] related to the
Toda lattice in the Flaschka–Manakov coordinates.

SECTION: Introduction
This paper is part of a research project on relations between
differential-difference matrix Lax representations (MLRs) with the action of gauge transformations
and discrete Miura-type transformations,
which belong to the main tools in the theory of (nonlinear) integrable differential-difference equations.
Such equations occupy a prominent place in the theory of integrable systems.
In particular, equations of this type arise as discretizations of integrable
partial differential equations (PDEs) and various geometric constructions
and as chains associated with Darboux and Bäcklund transformations of PDEs
(see, e.g.,and references therein).

In this paper,anddenote the sets of positive and nonnegative integers, respectively.
Let.
As explained in Section, we consider an evolutionary differential-difference equation
for an-component vector-function,
whereis an integer variable andis a real or complex variable.
Thus the componentsofare the dependent variables in the equation.

For each fixed integer, we consider also the vector-functiongiven by the formula.
The vector-functions,,
are called theshiftsof.

In Definitionin Sectionwe recall the notions of matrix Lax representations (MLRs) for
evolutionary differential-difference equations and
an action of the group of matrix gauge transformations
on the set of all MLRs of a given equation.
As discussed in Definition, in an MLRthe matrixcan be called the discrete (difference) part of the MLR.
For brevity, we callthe-partof the MLR.
Hereis the shift operator defined in Section.

In general,depends on a finite number of the dynamical
variables,,
and a parameter. For any fixed integers, we can relabel

Relabeling () says that in the considered differential-difference equation
one makes the invertible change of variables

Applying a relabeling () with suitable fixed,
we can transformto the formfor some.

This paper deals mainly with MLRssuch that the-partmay depend only on. Thusis of the form

In the existing literature on differential-difference equations
with two independent variablesand,
the majority of known MLRs are of the type ()
or can be brought to the form ()
by a relabeling () with suitable.

In () one does not require fornontrivial dependence on all.
For instance, in some of the examples considered in this paper the matrixdoes not depend on.

We use a result from(formulated in Propositionin Sectionof the present paper)
describing sufficient conditions which allow one
to eliminate the dependence onin theof a given MLR by means of a gauge transformation.
As discussed below,
in the present paper we demonstrate how this result helps to construct
new MLRs and new integrable equations connected by new MTs to known equations.
We give detailed descriptions of such constructions in concrete examples.
The constructions presented in this paper can be applied to many more examples,
which will be considered elsewhere.

When one makes a classification for some class of (1+1)-dimensional integrable equations
(which may be partial differential, difference or differential-difference),
it is often possible to obtain an explicit list of basic equations such that all the other equations
from the considered class can be derived from the basic ones by using MTs
(see, e.g.,and references therein).
Furthermore, MTs often help to construct conservation laws as well as
Darboux and Bäcklund transformations for (1+1)-dimensional equations
(see, e.g.,).
Hence it is desirable to develop constructions of MTs.

In this paper we present examples of constructions of MTs in the situation
when one has an equationpossessing an MLRwith-partsatisfying conditions of Proposition.
In such a situation Propositionallows us
to transform (by means of a gauge transformation) the MLRto a new MLRwith-part of the form.
Then we construct MTs by exploring the structure of the auxiliary linear system
associated with the MLR.

Using this approach, in Sectionwe construct the following.

A parametric family of new integrable equations ()
depending on a parameter.

A parametric family of new MTs () from () to
the two-component Belov–Chaltikian lattice (),
which is the Boussinesq lattice related to the lattice-algebra.

A parametric family of new MTs () from () to equation ()
introduced in. As shown by G. Marí Beffa and Jing Ping Wang, the integrable equation () describes the evolution induced on invariants
by an invariant evolution of planar polygons.

Also, we obtain a new MLR () for equation ()
and a new MLR (described in Remark) for equation ().
Each of these MLRs has a parameter.

In Sectionwe consider the integrable equation ()
constructed inwith the MT ()
to the Toda lattice () written in the Flaschka–Manakov coordinates.
As shown in, equation () possesses
the MLR (), () with-part of the form.
Propositionis applicable here,
but in this case the straightforward application of Propositiongives rather cumbersome formulas.

Because of this, in Sectionwe present a different approach,
in order to eliminate the dependence onin theby means of a gauge transformation.
We find a suitable gauge transformation by solving some matrix ordinary differential equations.

Using the obtained gauge equivalent MLR withdepending only onand, in Sectionwe construct

a parametric family of new integrable equations ()
depending on a parameter;

new MTs (), () from ()
to known equations (), () related to the Toda lattice;

a new MLR (), () for equation ();

a new MLR (described in Remark) for equation ().

Each of the constructed MLRs has a parameter.

SECTION: Preliminaries
In this paper scalar functions are assumed to take values in.

Fix. Below we consider an equation
for an-component vector-function

of an integer variableand a real or complex variable.
For any fixed integer,
we have,
where for eachthe componentis a function
ofgiven by the formula.
In particular,.

Letsuch that.
Consider an evolutionary differential-difference equation

whereis an-component vector-function.

The differential-difference equation () says that one has
the following infinite set of differential equations

Considering the components ofand, we can rewrite () as

which yields

We employ the formal theory of evolutionary differential-difference equations, which views

as independent quantities calleddynamical variables.
In what follows, the notationsays
that a functiondepends on a finite
number of the dynamical variablesforand.

For any fixed integers,
the notationsandindicate thatmay depend onwithand.

Letbe theshift operatorwith respect to the variable.
Applyingto a function, one gets the functionsuch that. Clearly, the operatoris invertible,
which allows us to consider, for each integer,
theth powerof. One has.

Sincecorresponds to, we have

Thus, applyingto a function,
one replacesbyinfor all.

Using the componentsof the vector-functionfrom (),
one defines thetotal derivative operatoracting on
functions of

Formula () reflects the chain rule for the derivative with respect to,
taking into account equations ().
The presented definitions ofandimplyfor any function.

Let.
Letandbematrices (matrix-functions)
depending on a finite number of the variablesand a parameter.
Suppose that the matrixis invertible andsatisfy

Then the pairis called amatrix Lax representation(MLR) for equation ().

The connection between () and () is as follows.
The componentsof the right-hand sideof () appear in the formula () for the operator, which is used in ().

Relation () implies that the following (overdetermined) auxiliary linear system
for an invertiblematrix

is compatible modulo equation ().

The matrixcan be called the discrete (difference) part of the MLR.
For brevity, we callthe-partof the MLR.

Letbe an MLR for equation ().
Then for any invertiblematrixone gets another MLR for () as follows

The MLRis said to begauge equivalentto the MLR,
andis called agauge transformation.
One can say thatis derived fromby means of the gauge transformation.

Gauge transformations constitute a group with respect to the multiplication of invertible matrices.

Formulas () define an action of the group of gauge transformationson the set of all MLRs of a given equation ().

In, such differential-difference matrix Lax representations
are called Darboux–Lax representations,
since many of them originate from Darboux transformations of
(1+1)-dimensional PDEs (see, e.g.,).

In this paper, for any functionand each integerwe denote bythe function ofgiven by. In particular,.

Let,.
Consider another-component evolutionary differential-difference equation

for an-component vector-function.

AMiura-type transformation(MT) from equation ()
to equation () is written as

with the following requirements:

the right-hand side of ()
is an-component vector-functiondepending on a finite number of the dynamical variables,,

ifsatisfies equation ()
thendetermined by () satisfies equation ().

More precisely, the second requirement means that we must have relations () explained below.
The components of the vector formula () are

Substituting the right-hand side of () in place ofin (), one gets

which must be valid identically in the variables.

Let. Thenandare scalar functions.
One has the well-known MTfrom the modified Narita–Itoh–Bogoyavlensky equationto the Narita–Itoh–Bogoyavlensky equation.

Propositionis proved in,
using some ideas from.

SECTION: Integrable equations, Lax representations,
and Miura-type transformations related to the Belov–Chaltikian lattice
SECTION: An application of Proposition
The two-component Belov–Chaltikian lattice,
which is the Boussinesq lattice related to the lattice-algebra, is the equation

where,.
It is knownthat the following matrices form an MLR for ()

G. Marí Beffa and Jing Ping Wangobtained the equation

describing the evolution induced on invariants by an invariant evolution of planar polygons.

It is noticed inthat the formulas

determine an MT from () to ().

We relabel

This means that we make the following invertible change of variables

Applying the change (), () to (), (), (), (), we get

Applying the invertible operatorto the first component in (), ()
and the second component in (), one obtains

Thus () is an MLR for equation (), while
() is an MT from () to ().

Below we use the notation () with.
That is, for eachone has.

Substituting () in (), we obtain the following MLR for equation ()

The matrix () satisfies conditions (), ().
Therefore, we can apply Propositionto the MLR (), ().
In order to apply Propositionin this case, we need to

choose a constant vector,

substituteingiven by (),

consider the matrix,

computegiven by (),

choose another constant vector,

substituteinand consider,

computegiven by (),

apply the obtained gauge transformationto the MLR (), () and compute the gauge equivalent MLRgiven by (), ().

It is convenient to take.
Since,
in order to substitutein,
we substitute,in the right-hand side of ().
Then

Using () and (),
one computesgiven by () as follows

Now we takeand substitutein.
This means that we substitute,in the right-hand side of ().
Then

This allows us to computegiven by () as follows

Finally, applying the obtained gauge transformation () to the MLR (), ()
and computing the MLRgiven by (), (), we obtain

In agreement with Proposition, we see that
the matrix () depends only on,
in contrast to the matrix () depending on.

SECTION: Constructions of new Miura-type transformations and integrable equations
Fix a constant.
Below we consider the matrices (), () withreplaced by.

According to Definition, since the matrices (), ()
form an MLR for equation (), we can consider the auxiliary linear system

which is compatible modulo equation ().
Hereis an invertiblematrix
whose elements we denote by,.

Let

be the elements of thematrices,given by (), ()
withreplaced by. We have

System () reads

From () one gets

We setand.
From () it follows that

Equation () gives us explicit formulas for the functions,.
Substituting these formulas in (), (), one obtains

Below we use the notation

From (), () one gets

which implies

Equation () yields explicit formulas for the functions

We substitute these formulas along with () to equations (), (),
which gives

Recall that system () is compatible modulo equation ()
and is equivalent to ().
Since equations (), () are derived from (),
system (), () is compatible modulo equation () as well.
This implies that () is an MT from () to ().

Thus () is an MT for equation ().
As explained above, () is obtained from ()
by means of an invertible transformation involving ().
In order to return from () to () and to derive an MT for equation (),
we are going to use the relabeling

which is the inverse of ().
That is, we make the change,.

Applying the relabeling () to (), (), (), (), we get

Applying the operatorto the second component in () and (),
one obtains () and

Thus () is an MT from () to (),
while () is an MLR for ().

Computing the composition of the MTs () and (),
we get the following MT

from equation () to the Belov–Chaltikian lattice ().

As shown above, the matrices (), () form a-dependent MLR for (),
while formula () is an MT from () to ().
It is easily seen that these two facts imply the following.
Substituting () in (), (), one
obtains a-dependent MLR for equation ().
This MLR for () seems to be new.

Equation () is integrable in the sense that
() possesses a nontrivial MLR with parameterand is connected by the MT ()
to the well-known integrable Belov–Chaltikian lattice equation ().

SECTION: Integrable equations, Lax representations,
and Miura-type transformations related to the Toda lattice
Consider the (non-evolutionary) Toda lattice equation for a scalar function

Following H. Flaschka and S.V. Manakov,
consider the functions

Then equation () yields the two-component evolutionary equation

which is sometimes called theToda lattice in the Flaschka–Manakov coordinates.

It is known that the following matrices form an MLR for ()

The following result is presented in.
Fix constants. The two-component equation

is connected to () by the MT

Below we use the notation () with.
That is, for eachone has.
As shown in,
substituting () in (), one obtains the following MLR for equation ()

As noticed in,
the matrix () satisfies conditions (), (),
hence one can use Proposition.
(Note that Propositiondoes not require nontrivial dependence onin the matrix.)
Applying Propositionto the MLR (), (),
we get the gauge equivalent MLR

where the gauge transformationis given by ()
andis the total derivative operator corresponding to equation ().
However, in this case the straightforward application of Propositiongives rather cumbersome formulas.

Below we use a different approach, in order to find a gauge
transformationsuch that
in the corresponding gauge equivalent MLR

the-partdepends only on.

We want to find an invertible matrixsuch that
the right-hand side of () does not depend on.
That is, we want to findsuch that

Sincedoes not depend onand is required to be invertible,
equations (), () are equivalent to

which say that

Multiplying (), () byfrom the right,
we can rewrite (), () as

Applying the operatorto (), (), we get the differential equations

for an unknown matrix.

For the matrix () we have

In what follows the elements of thematrixare denoted by,, where.
Substituting (), () andto equations (), (), we get

It is sufficient to find one (preferably as simple as possible) invertible matrix

satisfying () and ().
Equations (), () allow us to take

Taking into account (), we can rewrite (), () as the system

where,.
It is sufficient to find some functions,such that,satisfyand the functionis nonzero
(so thatis invertible).

From (), () it is clear that one can take

Substituting () to equations (), (), we obtain

Integrating () and (), we see that one can take

Thus we have constructed the following matrix

which can be used as a gauge transformation.

Applying the gauge transformation () to the MLR (), ()
as written in (), (), we get

The fact that the matrix () depends only onandallows one to construct a family of new MTs as follows.

According to Definition, since the matrices (), ()
form an MLR for equation (), we can consider the auxiliary linear system

which is compatible modulo equation ().
Hereis an invertiblematrix
whose elements we denote by,.

Let

be the elements of thematrices,given by (), (). We have

System () reads

From () one gets

We set.
From (), () we obtain

Since, according to (), (), forone has

equations (), () can be written as

where the parametercan take any value from.

Fix constants,.
Considering equations (), () in the caseand denotingbyin this case, we obtain

Similarly, considering equations (), () in the caseand denotingbyin this case, we get

As usual, we are going to use the notation

To avoid cumbersome formulas, we fix a constantand consider the case

In the case (), from equations () and ()
we can express,in terms of

as follows

For each, applying the operatorto (), we get

Substituting () in the right-hand sides of formulas (), (),
we obtain the two-component equation

Recall that system () is compatible modulo equation ()
and is equivalent to (), ().
Since equations (), (), (), (), (), ()
are derived from (), (),
system (), () and system (), ()
are compatible modulo () as well.
Since (), () are derived from
(), (), (), () with (),
system (), () is also compatible modulo equation () with.
This implies that () is an MT from () to ()
with.

Computing the composition of the MTs () and (),
one gets the following MT

from equation () to equation ().

As shown above, the matrices (), ()
form a-dependent MLR for (),
while formula () is an MT from ()
to equation () with.
Similarly to Remark, these two facts yield the following.
Substituting () in (), () with,
one obtains a-dependent MLR for equation ().
This MLR for () seems to be new.

Equation () is integrable in the sense that
() has a nontrivial MLR with parameterand is connected by the MT ()
to the well-known integrable Toda lattice
(in the Flaschka–Manakov coordinates) equation ().

The obtained equation () and MTs (), ()
are new, to our knowledge.

SECTION: Acknowledgments
The work on the results presented in Sectionwas funded by the Russian Science Foundation project No. 20-71-10110 ().

The work on Sectionwas done with financial support by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation
(Agreement No. 075-02-2024-1442)
within the activity of the Regional Mathematical Center of the P.G. Demidov Yaroslavl State University.

SECTION: References