SECTION: What drives the Hicontent of central galaxies - A comparison between hydrodynamic simulations and observations using Random Forest

We investigate the driving mechanisms for theHigas content in star-forming central galaxies at low redshift, by examining theHi-to-stelalr mass ratio () in both the state-of-the-art hydrodynamic simulations, IllustrisTNG (TNG) and EAGLE, and the xGASS sample. We quantify the correlations ofwith a variety of galaxy properties using the random forest regression technique, and we make comparisons between the two simulations, as well as between the simulations and xGASS. Gas-phase metallicity is found to be most important in both simulations, but is ranked mildly for xGASS, suggesting that metals and gas driven by feedback effects in real galaxies is not as tightly coupled as in the simulations. Beyond that, the accretion rate of supermassive black holes is the most important feature in TNG, while specific star formation rate is the top ranked in EAGLE. This result can be understood from the fact that theHigas is regulated mainly by thermal-mode AGN feedback in TNG and by stellar feedback in EAGLE. Although neither simulation can fully reproduce the feature importance obtained for real galaxies in the xGASS, EAGLE performs better than TNG in the sense that the observationally top-ranked property,, is also highly ranked in EAGLE. This result implies that stellar feedback plays a more dominant role than AGN feedback in driving theHigas content of low-redshift galaxies.

SECTION: 1Introduction

In current models, galaxies form at the center of dark matter halos through cooling and condensation of gas(White & Rees,1978; Mo et al.,2010).
Theoretically, gas-related processes in/around galaxies have been extensively studied in the past decade with the help of cosmological hydrodynamic simulations, such as Horizon-AGN(Dubois et al.,2012), Magneticum111http://www.magneticum.org/simulations.html, EAGLE(Crain et al.,2015; Schaye et al.,2015), FIRE(Hopkins,2015; Hopkins et al.,2014), Illustris(Vogelsberger et al.,2014a,b; Sijacki et al.,2015; Genel et al.,2014), IllustrisTNG(Springel et al.,2018; Naiman et al.,2018; Marinacci et al.,2018; Nelson et al.,2018; Pillepich et al.,2018), and SIMBA(Davé et al.,2019). In particular, many efforts have been made to investigate atomic hydrogen (Hi), the dominant component of cold gas. These simulations are usually able to reproduce the abundance of galaxies as a function of theHimass and theHisize-mass relation in the local Universe(e.g. Bahé et al.,2016; Crain et al.,2017; Diemer et al.,2019; Ma et al.,2022). However, the simulations have also shown that theHicontent of a galaxy can be regulated by a variety of processes, including consumption by star formation(Springel & Hernquist,2003; Schaye & Dalla Vecchia,2008; Hopkins et al.,2014), heating or outflows by stellar feedback(Pillepich et al.,2018; Dalla Vecchia & Schaye,2012; Hopkins et al.,2014)and active galactic nucleus (AGN) feedback(Booth & Schaye,2009; Dubois et al.,2012; Weinberger et al.,2017), and tidal or ram-pressure stripping by surrounding hot gas and companion galaxies(Marasco et al.,2016; Stevens et al.,2019; Watts et al.,2020). Different simulations use different mechanisms to reproduce the observations ofHigas, and it is unclear which mechanisms drive theHimass and distribution in real galaxies. For instance, using EMP-pathfinder(Reina-Campos et al.,2022)andFIREbox(Feldmann et al.,2023),Gensior et al. (2024)showed that different subgrid physics can result in consistent galaxy-wideHiproperties, but the small-scale properties are very different, with the rotational asymmetry of theHidiscs has the strongest dependence on the physical processes implemented.

On the observational side, largeHisurveys accomplished in the past two decades, such asHiParkes All-Sky Survey(HIPASS; Meyer et al.,2004)and Arecibo Legacy Fast ALFA survey(ALFALFA; Giovanelli et al.,2005), have greatly advanced our understanding ofHigas properties in local galaxies. These include the abundance ofHi-rich galaxies as quantified by theHimass function (HIMF;Zwaan et al.2005; Martin et al.2010; Jones et al.2018), the dependence of galaxy clustering onHimass(Meyer et al.,2007; Martin et al.,2012; Papastergis et al.,2013; Guo et al.,2017), the scaling relations ofHimass fraction with various galaxy properties(Kannappan,2004; Zhang et al.,2009; Li et al.,2012; Huang et al.,2012; Catinella et al.,2010; Obreschkow et al.,2016; Catinella et al.,2018; Zu,2020; Li et al.,2022; Lu et al.,2024), and theHi-to-halo mass relation for both central galaxies and all the galaxies in dark matter halos(Hess & Wilcots,2013; Barnes & Haehnelt,2014; Guo et al.,2017; Paul et al.,2018; Villaescusa-Navarro et al.,2018; Obuljen et al.,2019; Guo et al.,2020; Chauhan et al.,2020; Calette et al.,2021; Chauhan et al.,2021; Li et al.,2022; Rhee et al.,2023; Saraf et al.,2024). Furthermore, theHiscaling relations provide an economic but reliable way to estimate theHimass fraction for optically-selected galaxy samples that are much deeper and larger than the existingHisurveys.
This allows the abundance and clustering ofHi-selected galaxies to be measured more accurately and over larger dynamical ranges of galaxy properties.
For instance, by applying an improved estimator to the galaxy sample from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey(SDSS; York et al.,2000),Li et al. (2022)obtained the first estimates of the conditionalHimass functions (CHIMFs), that is, HIMFs for galaxies hosted by dark matter halos of given mass.

The observations ofHishould in principle provide useful constraints on the subgrid physics implemented in hydrodynamic simulations. For instance,Davé et al. (2020)found that SIMBA well reproduces the HIMF at, but overestimates theHifraction of massive galaxies, implying too strong a jet-mode AGN feedback which plays a major role in regulating theHigas content in this simulation. For IllustrisTNG, theHimass of central galaxies is found to have no or weak correlation with star formation rate(SFR; Ma et al.,2022), in contrast to the tight correlation betweenHimass fraction and SFR in real galaxies. InLi et al. (2022), the comparison of theHi-to-halo mass relation between observations and simulations show that both Illustris and IllustrisTNG simulations significantly overpredict theHimass for both the central galaxy and all the galaxies as a whole at fixed halo mass. Due to the complex subgrid physics in the simulations, as mentioned above, it is not immediately clear what causes the agreement and disagreement between simulations and observations.

In this work, we adopt the random forest algorithm(Breiman,2001)to investigate the driving processes for theHigas content in IllustrisTNG (hereafter TNG) and EAGLE. Both TNG and EAGLE are state-of-the-art hydrodynamic simulations, but they implement very different feedback models, thus allowing a comparison of the effects of different feedback processes on theHicontents of galaxies. Random forest is a widely-used machine learning algorithm that is able to efficiently identify the most important feature with respect to the target from a large parameter space(e.g. Bluck et al.,2022,2023; Baker et al.,2023; Ellison et al.,2024; Goubert et al.,2024; Jing & Li,2024; Li & Li,2024). We consider galaxy properties that are previously found to be correlated withHimass fraction (e.g., specific SFR, color, stellar mass, stellar surface density, gas metallicity), as well as other properties that are potential tracers of important gas-related processes (e.g., black hole mass and accretion rate). We then compare the importance pattern of the properties in simulated galaxies with that identified in the same way from the observed galaxies in the xGASS survey, aiming to find out the driving mechanisms for theHimass fraction in low-redshift galaxies.

This paper is organized as follows. Insection 2we first perform the random forest analysis for the two simulations. Insection 3we then perform the same analysis for the xGASS galaxy sample and make comparisons between the simulations and the observational results. Finally, we summarize our work insection 4.

SECTION: 2Random Forest analysis of simulations

SECTION: 2.1Data and Sample Selection

The IllustrisTNG project(Springel et al.,2018; Naiman et al.,2018; Marinacci et al.,2018; Nelson et al.,2018; Pillepich et al.,2018, hereafter TNG)is a suite of cosmological magneto-hydrodynamic simulations in aCDM universe run with the moving-mesh codearepo(Springel,2010). To ensure both resolution and volume, in this work we use the publicly available TNG100 data, which has a box length of 75and a baryonic mass resolution of.
IllustrisTNG adopts the cosmological parameters fromPlanck Collaboration et al. (2016):, and. The galaxy formation and evolution models in IllustrisTNG simulations include gas cooling, star formation, galactic winds, metal enrichment, supernovae, black hole growth, active galactic nuclei (AGN) feedback(Weinberger et al.,2017; Pillepich et al.,2018), and magnetic field.
Dark matter halos are identified using FoF algorithm(Davis et al.,1985). Then thesubfindalgorithm(Springel et al.,2001)is used to identify subhalos (galaxies) in FoF halos.

The EAGLE project(Crain et al.,2015; Schaye et al.,2015)is a suite of hydrodynamic simulations in aCDM universe. EAGLE was run using a modified version of the-Body Tree-PM smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) codeGADGET3, originally developed bySpringel (2005). The simulations adopt the cosmological parameters fromPlanck Collaboration et al. (2014):, and. In this work we use the fiducial simulation Ref-L100N1504, which has a volume of sideMpc and a baryonic particle mass of. The subgrid processes implemented in Ref-L100N1504 include
radiative cooling, reionization, star formation, chemical enrichment, supernova feedback, black hole growth,
and AGN feedback. Dark matter halos and subhalos are identified using the FoF andsubfindalgorithms, respectively.

Both TNG and EAGLE output only the total mass of hydrogen element in each gas particle, without providing fractions of the ionized (Hii), atomic (Hi) and molecular () phases. The partition betweenHiandis done with a post-processing procedure, which is similar in the two simulations. The hydrogen gas is first divided into ionized and neutral phases, and models of theHi/partition are then applied to the neutral phase to estimate the mass fraction ofHiandgas. Both simulations implemented multiple models for theHi/partition.
As described inBahé et al. (2016), EAGLE applied theHi/models ofBlitz & Rosolowsky (2006)(BR06) andGnedin & Kravtsov (2011)(GK11). For TNG, as described inDiemer et al. (2018), theHi/partition is obtained by using the models ofLeroy et al. (2008)(L08),Gnedin & Kravtsov (2011)(GK11),Krumholz (2013)(K13),Gnedin & Draine (2014)(GD14), andSternberg et al. (2014)(S14). In most models theHi/partition is based on gas surface density, which is not naturally available in hydrodynamic simulations. In TNG, the gas surface density is estimated in two different ways, either by multiplying the volume density with the Jeans length (the volumetric (vol) method), or by projecting the gas cells along the direction of the gas angular momentum (the projected (map) method). In
EAGLE, theHiandgases are assumed to have the same scale height so that the ratio of surface densities ofandHiis the same as the ratio of their volume densities.

We consider the following galaxy properties for the random forest analysis of the simulations:

:
the logarithm of the stellar mass, in units of solar mass. This is the sum of masses of all stellar particles within 30 kpc. A fixed aperture of 30 kpc is demonstrated to track the Petrosian radii used in observations(Schaye et al.,2015).

:
the logarithm of the stellar surface mass density, defined by, whereis the half stellar mass radius in units of kpc.

:
the logarithm of the specific star formation rate, defined as, where SFR is the instantaneous star formation rate calculated using all the star-forming gas elements belonging to the subhalo for EAGLE galaxies and using star-forming gas cells within 2 times of the half stellar mass radius for TNG galaxies.

:
the logarithm of the stellar velocity dispersion. For EAGLE galaxies,is the one-dimensional velocity dispersion of all stellar particles. For TNG galaxies,is approximated using the one-dimensional velocity dispersion of all subhalo member particles.

: color index defined by the difference in absolute magnitude betweenandband. The absolute magnitudes are calculated using stellar population synthesis models with dust obscuration taken into account(Trayford et al.,2015; Nelson et al.,2018).

: gas phase metallicity of star forming gas.
This is calculated using all the star-forming gas elements belonging to the subhalo for EAGLE galaxies and star-forming gas cells within 2 times of the half stellar mass radius for TNG galaxies.

: the logarithm of the mass of the central supermassive black hole, in units of.

: the logarithm of the accretion rate of the central supermassive black hole, in units of.

: the logarithm of the maximum value of the spherically-averaged rotation velocity, in units of.

: the logarithm of the stellar metallicity, derived from all stellar member particles in EAGLE, and from stellar member particles within twice the half stellar mass radius in TNG.

We note that, in both EAGLE and TNG, theHimass is measured using an aperture of 70 kpc, and the stellar mass is measured within 30 kpc for the consistency of sample selection. For all other properties, we directly take the measurements from the subhalo catalogs, publicly available through the websites of the two simulations222EAGLE: https://icc.dur.ac.uk/Eagle/database.php; TNG: https://www.tng-project.org/data/. For the star formation rate and gas metallicity, EAGLE considers all gas particles belonging to the subhalo, while TNG only considers gas cells belonging to the subhalo within twice the half stellar mass radius (). Star-forming gas is expected to concentrate in the inner region, mostly within. In addition, the feature importance analysis is sensitive to the ranking but not the absolute value of the properties considered. For these reasons, the small differences in property definitions are expected to have negligible effects on the results presented in this work.

Our investigation focuses on star-forming central galaxies, for the following two considerations. First, most of the quenched galaxies do not have reliableHigas measurements due to the limited mass resolution of the simulations. Second, theHicontent of satellite galaxies is known to suffer from environmental effects such as ram-pressure stripping and tidal stripping, making it hard to reliably assess the importance of properties internal to the galaxies. We will come back and study the effect of environments in the future. Here, we select star-forming central galaxies with stellar massand specific star formation rate. To avoid unreliableHigas meaurements, we further require theHi-to-stellar mass ratio to be larger than a fixed limit:. These restrictions give rise to a sample of 10,205 galaxies from TNG, and a sample of 6,287 galaxies from EAGLE. The left two panels ofFigure 1show
the distribution of sample galaxies in theversusdiagram. As expected, galaxies in both samples are
predominantly blue, with. Both samples are dominated by galaxies of low to intermediate masses, with very few galaxies
with mass exceeding. EAGLE galaxies show a positive correlation between the color and the mass,
which is not obviously seen in TNG.

SECTION: 2.2Feature Importance Ranking in the Simulations

Following common practice, we use the Gini importance value provided by the random forest regressor to assess the significance of individual galaxy properties to theHi-to-stellar mass ratio. The properties used are listed and described insubsubsection 2.1.4. We use thescikit-learn333https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html(Pedregosa et al.,2011)machine learning python package to realize the random forest algorithm. The importance of properties for the TNG sample is shown inFigure 2in a decreasing
order. Plotted in different colors are results for differentHi/partition models, while the solid and dashed lines of the same color represent results for a givenHi/partition model using two different methods to determine the gas surface
density (seesubsubsection 2.1.4).
The uncertainties of the feature importance are estimated by the scatter between 40 subsamples, each constructed by
randomly selecting two thirds of the galaxies from the full sample.

In all the models, the black hole accretion rate () and the gas-phase metallicity () are ranked as the top two properties in terms of feature importance, withthe most important for L08map, S14vol and S14map, andthe most important
for all other models. The two properties are followed by the stellar surface mass density () and the
stellar metallicity (). The specific star formation rate,, is surprisingly ranked as the least
important property, a result that is opposite to the well-known correlation between cold gas content and star formation in galaxies. Nevertheless, the results shown inFigure 2demonstrate that the ranking of feature importance obtained
from TNG is robust to the choice ofHi/partition models for all the properties except betweenand.

For EAGLE, although twoHi/partition models (BR06 and GK11) were used, the resultingHidata is publicly available
only for BR06. InFigure 3, the feature importance obtained from the BR06 model are plotted as the orange circles
with error bars. For comparison, the results of the differentHi/partition models from TNG are plotted as the blue shaded region,
with the upper and lower envelopes corresponding, respectively, to the maximum and minimum importance among
all theHi/partition models
for any given property. The blue circles with error bars represent the L08map model in TNG, which estimates the
ratio betweenandHigas surface density as a power law of midplane pressure, in the same way as the BR06 model.
In what follows we will only consider the L08map model for TNG and the BR06 model for EAGLE, for simplicity.

As can be seen fromFigure 3, the most important property in EAGLE is, followed byand.
This is in contrast to TNG, whereis ranked the top andthe bottom. The importance ofin EAGLE is nearly zero.
The only similarity between the two simulations is thatis important in both. The overall difference between the two
simulations is quite striking: while the HI content in EAGLE is dominated by two properties,
in TNG more factors seem to be involved. This indicates that EAGLE and TNG are intrinsically different.
In the following subsection, we examine sources leading to the difference between the two simulations
as revealed by the feature importance of HI contents of galaxies, and show that the difference
can be understood in terms of the different treatments of key subgrid processes that regulate
star formation and feedback.

SECTION: 2.3Implications of the Feature Importance

We first examine the correlation of theHigas content with the black hole accretion rate.
This rate is one of the most important properties in TNG but shows no importance in EAGLE.
InFigure 4, we show the distribution of galaxies
in theversus black hole mass () plane, color-coded by theHi-to-stellar mass ratio
(hereafterHimass fraction or). As one can see, EAGLE shows an overabundance of low mass black
holes () in comparison to TNG, possibly caused by the different black hole seed mass
adopted in TNG () and EAGLE (). Both simulations show a positive
correlation betweenand. In TNG and below, theHimass
fraction is negatively correlated withand nearly independent of black hole mass.
Above, theHimass fraction plummets due to the onset of the kinetic mode
of AGN feedback. Such a feedback prevents the cooling of gas in the CGM and the replenishment of the
cold gas in ISM, leading to the quenching of star formation(Zinger et al.,2020; Piotrowska et al.,2022).
In contrast, EAGLE shows only a weak negative correlation betweenandHimass fraction, and
the value ofis on average much lower than that in TNG. These results are consistent
with the feature importance as found above.

In EAGLE, most of the sample galaxies have, corresponding to a halo mass ofbased on the stellar-to-halo mass relation of central galaxies at z=0(Wechsler & Tinker,2018). In these low-mass halos, the gas outflow driven by stellar feedback is able to escape from the host halo and to affect the CGM(Mitchell et al.,2020; Wright et al.,2024). The rate of gas inflow into the ISM is thus very low,
leading to the low rate of black-hole accretion observed inFigure 4and
inefficient AGN feedback. In addition, since the AGN feedback energy in EAGLE is not released until it is high
enough to increase the temperature of a neighboring gas particle by(Schaye et al.,2015; Crain et al.,2015), the feedback energy released at one time does not necessarily
correspond to the accretion rate of the supermassive black hole at the same time, which
may reduce the correlation between the cold gas content and the accretion rate of the central black hole.
Even for galaxies with high black hole accretion rates, EAGLE does not show a significant correlation
between the black hole accretion rate and theHimass fraction,
indicating that it is the pulse-like characteristic, not the low accretion rate,
that is responsible for the low importance of the black hole accretion rate in EAGLE.
This is consistent with the result ofWard et al. (2022)who found
a weak trend of the molecular gas fraction with the luminosity of the central AGN in EAGLE and interpreted it as
a consequence of the “pulsed” AGN feedback.

In contrast, most galaxies in the TNG sample are in the thermal mode of AGN feedback which continuously inject
energy into the surrounding ISM, producing a strong negative relationship between theHimass fraction and the
black hole accretion rate. In addition, as shown inDavé et al. (2020), the amplitude of the HIMF decreases in TNG but
increases in SIMBA and EAGLE as one goes fromto.
Since both TNG and SIMBA implement stellar feedback using decoupled kinetic winds,
the striking difference in the evolution of the HIMF is likely caused by the thermal AGN feedback
implemented in TNG, which is expected to be stronger atthan at(Weinberger et al.,2017).Ma et al. (2022)andWard et al. (2022)also found a notable negative correlation between the cold gas fraction
and the accretion rate of the thermal mode AGN.
These previous studies and our results all show that the thermal AGN feedback in TNG
affects significantly the cold gas content in star-forming galaxies at.

Next, we examine the correlation ofHigas content with the gas-phase metallicity and sSFR. As seen fromFigure 3,is identified as a very important feature in both EAGLE and TNG, whileis only important in EAGLE.Figure 5plots theHimass fraction as a function of, with the black contours showing the number density of galaxies and the color-coding showing.
As can be seen from the right panel, EAGLE galaxies show strong correlations between each pair ofHimass fraction, sSFR and gas-phase metallicity, a result that is in broad agreement with previous results(Ellison et al.,2008; Mannucci et al.,2010; Bothwell et al.,2013; Hughes et al.,2013; Zahid et al.,2014; De Rossi et al.,2017). As pointed out inLagos et al. (2016), these correlations are a consequence of the self-regulation of star formation, which dominates the gas-star-gas cycling for low-mass galaxies like the EAGLE galaxies studied here. In this case, the inflow of pristine gas reduces gas metallicity and triggers star formation, which in turn release feedback energy and enriched metals to the surrounding gas, generating gas outflows and suppressing gas inflows. Galaxies thus evolve in a quasi-static way so that gas inflow, gas outflow and star formation occur at balanced rates, producing a tight relation
between star formation and cold gas mas.
For massive galaxies the self-regulation of star formation is broken due to AGN feedback, driving significant deviation from the relations between gas mass, stellar mass and gas metallicity(Zerbo et al.,2024). However, many of these
massive galaxies are quenched galaxies that are not selected into
our sample of star-forming galaxies.

Unlike EAGLE and contrary to observations, theHimass fraction of TNG galaxies is correlated only with gas metallicity, and shows no or weak correlation with sSFR.
We find that the different behaviors of the two simulations are caused by the different fractions ofHigas that is distributed outside the galaxies. This can be seen fromFigure 6. The left-hand panel shows theHimass enclosed within,and the radius of the host subhalo as a function of stellar mass, for both simulations. Withinand, the two simulations show similarHi-to-stellar mass relations. When the totalHigas is included, TNG galaxies have significantly larger amounts of gas outside the stellar radii, indicating more extendedHidiscs relative to the stellar disk. The right-hand panel further shows the ratio of the totalHimass within the host subhalo to theHimass within 2, which quantifies how centrally concentrated theHigas is. The ratio is roughly constant atin TNG, indicating that only one fifth of theHigas is locked within galaxies. In contrast, theHigas in EAGLE is more confined within galaxies, with much smaller values of the ratio at all masses. In particular, at lowest masses () nearly all theHigas in EAGLE galaxies is located within.
Considering the SFR is calculated within, this result indicates that only a small fraction ofHigas contributes to star formation in TNG, thus resulting in a weak correlation betweenHigas fraction and sSFR. If one only considers theHigas within, as shown in the inset, theHimass is indeed positively correlated with SFR in both simulations, although the relation in TNG shows a flatter slope and a larger scatter compared to that in EAGLE.

In summary, the above results combine to show that theHicontents in EAGLE and TNG are regulated by distinct feedback processes. In EAGLE and for galaxies of, stellar feedback efficiently expels ISM gas out of host halos, leading to suppressed rates of gas inflow onto both ISM and central supermassive black hole(Mitchell et al.,2020; Davies et al.,2020)and thus a negligible effect of AGN feedback. In this case, star formation is self-regulated, leading to balance between gas outflow/inflow and star formation, and a tight correlations between SFR andHimass fraction and stellar mass. AGN feedback is important in EAGLE only for massive halos () where the gravitational potential is deep enough to prevent the star formation-driven outflow(Bower et al.,2017), and so the established relation between the HI mass and the star formation rate is not destroyed
by the AGN feedback in low-mass galaxies that dominate our sample.

In TNG, galactic wind driven by star formation is gentle and mostly stays within the host halo. The gas returns to the ISM and CGM after cooling(Davies et al.,2020; Ayromlou et al.,2023), forming a large and spatially extendedHireservior(Grand et al.,2019; Diemer et al.,2019; Yang et al.,2024). TheHi-to-stellar mass ratio is weakly correlated with sSFR which is determined by the gas withinof the galaxy. The central supermassive black hole is able to maintain a high accretion rate, continuously heating surrounding gas via thermal AGN feedback and resulting in a strong correlation between theHifraction and the black hole accretion rate discussed above.
In more massive halos (), AGN feedback is dominated by the kinetic mode, which can significantly reduce the CGM gas reservoir.
In this case, the amounts of star formation and cold gas are both suppressed,
leading to the formation of quenched galaxies that are not included
in the samples of star-forming galaxies concerned here.

Despite of the very different feedback models implemented
in the two simulations and their different predictions for the
relation between cold gas mass and star formation rate, both
simulations predict a strong correlation between the gas-phase metallicity
and the HI mass fraction. Such a tight relation is expected if
metals produced by star formation is well mixed in the ISM. In this case,
the fractional metal loss is proportional to the fractional
total-mass loss from the ISM and the ISM metallicity is determined by
the remaining gas fraction even when outflows and the inflow of
low-metallicity gas are involved(e.g. Lu et al.,2015).
Thus, the tight correlation between the gas metallicity and gas fraction
seen in both simulations is likely a result of the subgrid physics
that leads to a roughly uniform mixing of metals with the ISM before
feedback effects drive gas out from galaxies. The strong (weak) correlation
between the gas metallicity and the specific star formation rate
can then be understood as a result of the tight (loose) relation
between the cold gas fraction and the specific star formation rate
in EAGLE (TNG) discussed above.

SECTION: 3Comparison with Observations

SECTION: 3.1Observational Sample and Galaxy Properties

The GALEX Arecibo SDSS survey(GASS; Catinella et al.,2010)is a targetedHisurvey observed with the Arecibo telescope for a sample of galaxies with redshiftand a flat stellar mass distribution in the range.
The GASS sample is randomly selected from a parent sample ofgalaxies located in the overlapping region
among SDSS data release 6(Adelman-McCarthy et al.,2008), GALEX(Martin et al.,2005)Medium Imaging Survey,
and the ALFALFA survey footprint. Each galaxy is observed with Arecibo until itsHi21cm emission line is detected
or an upper limit ofof theHi-to-stellar mass ratio () is reached.
The xGASS entends the GASS survey down to a stellar mass lower limit of, by further
observing a sample of galaxies withand.
Here we use thexGASS representative sampleconstructed byCatinella et al. (2018), which includes 1179 galaxies and is representative to the general galaxy population. From this sample, we select central galaxies using the SDSS DR7 group catalog(Yang et al.,2007), and exclude galaxies withor without gas metallicity measurements (details ofand gas metallicity are described insubsubsection 3.1.2). The remaining sample contains 278 galaxies withHidetections. We will use this sample for our
Random Forest analysis. As shown in the right panel ofFigure 1, the xGASS sample has a flat stellar mass distribution and locates in the star-forming sequence with a slope similar to that of the EAGLE sample.

We consider the following five properties for the random forest analysis of the xGASS sample.

: logarithm of stellar mass, taken from the NASA-Sloan Atlas444http://nsatlas.org(NSA; Blanton et al.,2011), estimated by performing a spectral energy distribution (SED) fitting to the SDSS photometry, assuming a Chabrier stellar initial mass function(Chabrier,2003).

: logarithm of stellar surface density, defined as, whereis the elliptical Petrosian half light radius taken from the NSA.

: color index defined by theband andband absolute magnitude. The absolute magnitudes are taken from the NSA, measured within an elliptical Petrosian aperture based on GALEX and SDSS images respectively, with Galactic extinction corrected.

: gas phase metallicity, taken from the MPA/JHU SDSS catalog555https://wwwmpa.mpa-garching.mpg.de, derived from SDSS optical spectra using all the most prominent emission lines(Tremonti et al.,2004).

: logarithm of central stellar velocity dispersion, taken from the MPA/JHU SDSS catalog.

As mentioned above,andare found to be tightly correlated withHimass fraction in previous studies ofHiscaling relations(e.g. Kannappan,2004; Zhang et al.,2009; Li et al.,2022). The other properties,,and, are included in order for comparison with the simulations. Due to the lack of measurements, the rest of the properties considered above for the analysis of the simulations are not directly included here. However, some of them are indirectly included through their correlations with the
properties selected. These include the sSFR, the stellar metallicity and the black hole mass, which are known to be tightly correlated with,, and, respectively. This is also the case for, which is tightly correlated withaccording to the well-established stellar-to-halo mass relation of central galaxies in galaxy groups/clusters(Wechsler & Tinker,2018, and references therein). For the black hole accretion rate (), it is not immediately clear whether its importance is included indirectly.
In order to figure this out, we examined the feature importance of the five properties towith the random forest technique. As can be seen fromFigure 7, for TNG the surface mass density () presents the highest importance to, while,andshow similarly high importance in EAGLE. This result implies that, whenis not included in the random forest analysis, its importance may be inferred from the importance offor TNG and the combination of,andfor EAGLE. One should keep this result in mind when
interpreting the results presented in the following.

SECTION: 3.2Feature Importance to theHiFraction

We perform random forest analyses to determine the importance of the five galaxy properties described above to theHimass fraction, for both the observational sample xGASS and the EAGLE and TNG simulations. The results are shown inFigure 8. For real galaxies in xGASS, as can be seen, the two most important features areand. Bothandare ranked quite low, whileis in the middle. To make the comparison between simulations and the observation more meaningful, we have trimmed the EAGLE and TNG samples so that they have the same distributions in stellar mass as xGASS. For each simulation we repeat the procedure of sample trimming and the random forest analysis for 40 times. The final importance of each feature and its error are given by the average and the scatter of the 40 subsamples. Furthermore, we have added a “measurement error” to,andin the simulation data, assuming a Gaussian distribution with a full width at half maximum of 0.15, 0.05 and 0.15, respectively. These values are the typical measurement errors in the xGASS sample. We do not attempt to add errors forandas their importance are too low to affect the result significantly. It should be pointed out, though, that the “errors” added here only represent the lower limits,
as real data have more uncertainties (e.g. in the metallicity and in the stellar initial mass function) that are difficult
to model reliably. Fortunately, our results remain unchanged even if we completely ignore the errors, suggesting that
the results are robust to the uncertainties in the property measurements.

Figure 8shows that neither of the two simulations can fully reproduce the ranking of feature importance in the xGASS sample. The top-ranked property in both simulations,, is ranked only in the middle in the real sample. TNG is particularly in contrast
with the observational data: the top-ranked propertyin xGASS is now ranked at the bottom. The second-ranked propertyin xGASS is now ranked the second in TNG, a result that is largely (if not fully) produced by
the importance of black hole accretion rate () found above. Compared to TNG, EAGLE appears to
perform better in terms ofbeing ranked second. The low importance of,andin EAGLE is consistent with the low importance offound above. The gas-phase metallicity remains
important (ranks the top) in both simulations, in contrast to the observational data where it ranks the third.

InFigure 9we show theHifraction as functions of the five properties in both xGASS (red dots) and the two simulations (black contours). For the simulations we use the full galaxy sample rather than the trimmed subsamples in order for better statistics. We note that the results shown in the figure remain unchange if any of the subsamples is used instead. Spearman correlation coefficients are indicated in each panel. For xGASS, theHimass fraction is clearly anti-correlated withand, with high values of correlation coefficients (). A similar correlation withis seen in EAGLE but not in TNG
The strong correlation withis seen in TNG but not in EAGLE.
Theshows the strongest correlation with theHimass fraction in both simulations.
The correlation is weaker in xGASS, particularly towards the low-metallicity end.
These results are well consistent with the rankings of feature importance as shown in the
previous figure.

As discussed insubsection 2.3, the different feature importance to theHifraction
as found in the two simulations can be understood in terms of the different feedback processes implemented
in the simulations. The fact that the correlation between theHifraction and thecolor
(a good indicator of the sSFR) predicted by EAGLE is similar to that in xGASS implies that stellar feedback
plays a more important role than AGN feedback for the relatively low-mass galaxies studied here.
The importance ofin xGASS indicates that feedback processes affecting the cold gas content
of a galaxy are correlated with the structure of the galaxy in the central region. As shown earlier,
such a correlation is generated in the TNG by the strong dependence of(which determines the strength of AGN feedback) on. The role ofin EAGLE is much weaker than that in the observation. In principle, more intensive
star formation, such as starburst, is expected to be associated with the formation of higherand with stronger feedback, and so some correlation between the HI mass fraction andis expected. The discrepancy thus indicates that either EAGLE underestimates such a correlation,
or AGN feedback plays a more important role than that assumed in EAGLE, or both.
Unfortunately, feedback effects from AGN and starburst are difficult to distinguish
by their results for the cold gas content of galaxies. Observational constraints on
black hole mass and AGN activities in low-mass galaxies are needed to break the
degeneracy. Finally, the high importance of gas-phase metallicity in both simulations is not
seen in xGASS. As discussed above, a tight correlation between the gas-phase
metallicity and the gas fraction is expected when metals generated are
well mixed with the ISM so that the loss of metal mass in outflows is proportional to that of gas mass.
The weaker correlation seen in xGASS thus suggests that the metal and gas in real galaxies are
not as tightly coupled as in the simulations.

SECTION: 4Summary

In this work, we attempt to understand the driving mechanisms for theHigas content of star-forming central galaxies in the local Universe, by examining two of the current hydrodynamical simulations, IllustrisTNG and EAGLE, as well as the xGASS galaxy sample. Applying the random forest algorithm to a variety of galaxy properties of both simulated and observed galaxies, we obtain the feature importance of the properties to theHi-to-stellar mass ratio (). In addition, we examine the correlations ofwith the galaxy properties, in order to better understand the feature importance, and we compare the results between the two simulations, and between the simulations and the xGASS sample.

Our conclusions are summarized as follows.

The two simulations behave differently in the random forest analysis. For EAGLE, gas-phase metallicity () and specific star formation rate (sSFR) are identified as the most important features, and both properties show a tight and negative correlation with theHimass fraction. For TNG, the two top-ranked properties are black hole accretion rate () and, which are also negatively correlated with. The differences between the two simulations can be understood from the different feedback processes adopted. In EAGLE, theHicontent of central galaxies is mainly regulated by stellar feedback, which drives strong gas outflows out to the virial radius of the host halo, thus efficiently suppressing gas inflow and star formation. Consequently, the central supermassive black hole cannot grow efficiently due to the limited gas supply, and AGN feedback is weak and inefficient. In TNG, in contrast, stellar feedback is too weak to efficiently suppress gas inflow, and the black hole is able to grow efficiently and heat the surrounding gas continuously through thermal mode AGN feedback. As a result, in the TNG sample, the regulation ofHicontent is dominated by the thermal mode AGN feedback.

Neither simulation can fully reproduce the feature importance of the real galaxies in xGASS, for which the color index ofand surface stellar mass density () are ranked in the first two places. EAGLE performs better than TNG in the sense thatis ranked highly in EAGLE but at the bottom in TNG. This result implies that stellar feedback is likely to play a more dominant role than AGN feedback in driving theHicontent of central galaxies at low redshift. Unlike in the simulations, gas-phase metallicity is ranked only mildly for xGASS, suggesting that metals and gas caused by feedback effects in real galaxies is not as tightly coupled as in the simulations.

Our results demonstrate that observations ofHicontent can provide strong constraints on gas-related subgrid models in cosmological hydrodynamic simulations, which are able to reproduce both stellar and cold gas content of low-redshift galaxies but using different recipes. In the next decade spatially resolvedHiobservations will be available for large samples of galaxies and provide more constraints for the models, thanks to the many new-generationHisurveys (e.g., WALLABY,Koribalski et al.2020; MIGHTEE-HI,Maddox et al.2021; LADUMABlyth et al.2016).

SECTION: References