SECTION: Introduction

Schur multipliers are fundamental maps on matrix algebras, which admit a rather simple definitionfor any matrixand certain symbol. This easily extends to nonatomic-finite measure spaces, by restricting to operatorsinadmitting a kernel representation over. Schur multipliers have shown deep connections with functional and harmonic analysis, operator algebras, and geometric group theory. They played a key role in Grothendieck’s work on Banach spaces[11,33,35], Haagerup’s invariant approximation methods for the group von Neumann algebras of free groups and rank one semisimple lattices[5,14,10], Lafforgue/de la Salle’s rigidity theorem for high-rank lattices[20,21]or Potapov/Sukochev’s solution to Krein’s conjecture on operator-Lipschitz functions by solving the stronger Arazy’s conjecture on Schur multipliers[36]. More recently, Schur multipliers have been instrumental in[30]to construct singular Fourier multipliers in the group algebra ofand this has motivated a renewed interest in Schatten-estimates for nonToeplitz Schur multipliers. Namely, this class is more stable under cut/paste or deformation of symbols than Fourier multipliers and yields important nontrigonometric extensions of fundamental results for them. This includes the nonToeplitz forms of celebrated multiplier theorems by Marcinkiewicz, Hörmander-Mikhlin and Fefferman[7,8,31]and strong applications have been found in Lie group algebras[9,31]. Our results below extend these (best-known to date)-estimates for Schur multipliers.

Adrián González-Pérez was partially supported by Ramón y Cajal grant RYC2022-037045-I (Ministerio de Ciencia, Spain). Adrián González-Pérez, Javier Parcet and Jorge Pérez-García were supported by the Spanish Grant PID2022-141354NB-I00 and the Severo Ochoa Grant CEX2023-001347-S. Éric Ricard was supported by the French Grant ANR-19-CE40-0002.

It is important to recall a key relation between Fourier and Schur multipliers over amenable groups. Assume thatis an amenable group equipped with its Haar measure. Letdenote the Schatten-class overand letbe the noncommutative-space associated to the group von Neumann algebra. Letbe a Herz-Schur (also known as Toeplitz) symbol. Ifandrespectively denote matrix units and the left regular representation over, consider the Schur multiplierand the Fourier multiplier. Then, we know from[6,29]that the following identity holds for

This is known as Fourier-Schur transference. It clarifies why Schatten-bounds for nonToeplitz Schur multipliers over the classical groupsandappear as nontrigonometric extensions of Fourier-multipliers.

Riesz transforms are the archetypes of singular integrals, showing a great impact in harmonic analysis, fluid mechanics, differential geometry, and geometric measure theory. Given a square-integrable function, the Euclidean Riesz transforms acting onare defined as follows

Dimension-free estimates for the full Riesz transformgo back to the work of Gundy-Varopoulos and Stein[13,37]. Shortly after, a probabilistic interpretation by P.A. Meyer pioneered significant generalizations[3,4,12,27,32]for diffusion processes. The remarkable work of Lust-Piquard incorporated abelian groups and the first noncommutative models to the picture—her analysis for the Walsh system was applied by Naor in a striking connection with metric geometry[23,24,25,28]. Riesz transforms in von Neumann algebras have been systematically investigated in[17,19], the latter includes dimension-free estimates for arbitrary Markov processes in group von Neumann algebras. Given an index setand a Hilbert space, in this paper we consider Riesz-Schur transforms defined for finitely supported matricesas follows

In what followsdenotes the Schatten-class over. We start with dimension-free estimates for Riesz-Schur transforms. Instead of the usual statement in discrete settings[19], we allow non-mean-zero elements adding a diagonal term.

Letbe any index set and fix any familyof vectors in some Hilbert space. Consider a semifinite von Neumann algebra. Then the following inequalities hold forand anyup to universal constants

Hereand we adopt the convention thatwhen.

The-norm is nothing but a matrix analogue of the-norm of a square function. By well-known approximation properties of Schur multipliers[21], our discrete statement overholds as well for general-finite spaces. Theorem A is a nonToeplitz/basis-free extension of the main result in[19]. Indeed, it recovers the dimension-free estimates from[19,25,37]by Fourier-Schur transference results[6,29,30]. The Euclidean case follows by takingand, followed by Theorem 1.19 of[21]and Fourier-Schur transference (FS). Other-estimates for different laplacians and/or groups follow using appropriate cocycle maps. As it is customary, the extra ‘diagonal’ term in (RS2) disappears in continuous settings. Our constants match the best-known so far in this context. Arhancet and Kriegler also investigated it in[2, Theorem 3.3]. They followed[19]estimating-norms of the gaussian gradient—equivalently the Dirac operator— and their statement is equivalent to ours via a Khintchine type inequality. The main contribution in Theorem A is a cleaner statement and prominently a much simpler proof, which has facilitated to uncover interesting applications below. None of the usual harmonic analysis or probabilistic methods —like Fourier transforms and Calderón-Zygmund techniques or diffusion/Markov semigroups and Pisier’s reduction formula— are needed. On the contrary, our argument is modeled on Grothendieck’s inequality[33, Chapter 5]. This becomes quite enlightening and it is not accidental that Theorem A leads to a condition for Schatten-boundedness of Schur multipliers refining the Grothendieck-Haagerup’s endpoint criterion.

Consider arbitrary vectorsin some Hilbert spaceand letbe a contraction. Then, the following inequalities hold for anyup to absolute constants

Grothendieck-Haagerup type-criterion.The symbols

define cb-bounded Schur multipliers with.

Square root of Arazy’s divided differences.Given a nondecreasing Lipschitz function, it turns out that the symbol

defines a cb-bounded multiplier with.

Taking, we obtain symbols of the formfor some uniformly bounded families of vectors in. These characterize-bounded Schur multipliers[11,33,35]and Theorem B1 i) gives a weaker form of the Grothendieck-Haagerup criterion for Schatten-classes. We also get better constants for certain particular cases. The second criterion yields a significant strengthening of Arazy’s conjecture[1,36]. It should be compared with[8, Corollary 3.4]for-divided differences over-Hölder functions. Both results suggest in different forms that-boundedness holds forunder weak forms of Lipschitz continuity. More details can be found in Remark3.4. Our last result provides a very simple proof of two recent criteria which have received a lot of attention.

Given

Marcinkiewicz-Schur multipliers. If

Hörmander-Mikhlin-Schur multipliers.If

Our argument is again simpler and intrinsic, avoiding corepresentations and Euclidean harmonic analysis. In fact, we shall prove a stronger form of Theorem B2 ii) which strengthens the main result in[8]. In conclusion, Riesz-Schur transforms recover and refine well-known estimates for Hilbert transforms —Theorem A for— and Riesz transforms, Grothendieck-Haagerup’s multipliers, Arazy’s divided differences, Marcinkiewicz-Schur and Hörmander-Mikhlin-Schur multipliers[7,8,11,19,25,36,37]. To the best of our knowledge, these references give all known sufficient conditions on symbols for-bounded Schur multipliers and.

SECTION: 1.Hilbert-valued-spaces

Letbe any index set and consider a semifinite von Neumann algebrawith a normal semifinite faithful trace. Then, given, the corresponding noncommutative-spaces are denoted byor. In particular, the Schatten-classis nothing butandwill be identified with a space of matriceswith coefficients inor with sums of the formwhereare the standard matrix units. Any such matrix belongs towhen

SECTION: 1.1.The spaces

We recall basic facts on-row/column operator spaces. Our general reference is[34]. We present them using a tensor
approach rather than a coordinate one. Letbe a complex Hilbert space whose scalar product is chosen to be antilinear on the left. Given, we denote by—or simplyorif no confusion may occur— the
associated-column space with a fixed norm 1 vector. Namely, if we identify every vectorwith the rank-one operator, thenconsists of the closure in(weak-closure for) of simple tensors. Givena simple tensor in, its norm is

Ifis a bounded map, thenextends to a completely bounded map (weak-continuous for) onwith the same norm. We say thatis homogeneous. Similarly, the-row Hilbert spaceor simplyconsists of adjoints of elements in. It is the closure (weak--closure for) of simple tensorsidentifying eachwithin. The norm is then given by

This space is also homogeneous. Ifis bounded and, thenextends to a completely bounded map (weak-continuous for) onwith the same norm as. Recall the dualityandforandunder the bracket

To define the space, we need to seeas a compatible couple of Banach spaces, which requires a linear identification betweenand. This boils down to the choice of an orthonormal basisofor, equivalently, a real subspacesuch thatis a trivial complexification of; meaning thatas a real Hilbert space with the obvious-structure. Thus, there is an isometric conjugationacting trivially on. With this, we have continuous linear mapsrespectively extending

Another way to say it is thatcorresponds to. As usual we defineto beifandif. Thus, we find the following expressions for elementary tensors

where the infimum runs over all decompositions. It can easily be seen that one can indeed restrict to simple tensors. The spaceis then the completion of simple tensorsunder these norms, we only considerhere.is again homogeneous, ifis a bounded map, thenon simple tensors uniquely extends to a complete bounded map onwith cb-norm. Becauseis isometric, this follows easily from the same facts for,and the norm formulas. The duality betweenforfollows from that of row and column spaces up to identifications. The duality bracket is given for simple tensors by

SECTION: 1.2.Noncommutative Khintchine inequalities

We shall be using gaussian formulations of Lust-Piquard’s noncommutative Khintchine inequalities. Let us recall the gaussian or boson functor associated to a real Hilbert spacewith trivial complexification. This is a commutative von Neumann algebraequipped with a probability measureand generated by centered gaussian variableswith covariance

in the sense that. If, thenwithand we set. In what follows we shall use the operator-valued Khintchine inequalities in. Here we consider the-spaces overwithas real particular subspace. The result below follows by a simple change of basis from the main result in[22]and[26, Remark III.7].

There exists constantssuch that for any semifinite von Neumann algebra, any real Hilbert space, any, anyand,for

Let. Then, the Khintchine inequalities provide isomorphismscompatible with the duality bracket: for simple tensors

Moreover, taking the natural conditional expectation

we can relatewithandforas follows

Letbe the gaussian projection. That is, the orthogonal projection ofonto the closed subspace. For any von Neumann algebra,is also well defined onand it extends to an-projection.

The mapextends to a bounded projection onfor allwith norm less thanfor some constant.

Proof.Ifandis a simple tensor, then its gaussian projectionis of the formand we easily get the inequality below

Similar inequalities hold forand we can conclude thanks to the Khintchine inequalities in Theorem1.1and density. The casefollows by duality.

SECTION: 1.3.-bounded families of operators

Now we consider noncommutative forms of the notion of-bounded family of operators[15, Chapter 8]. Letstand for the canonical basis ofand fix. Letbe a sequence of operators. We say thatis-bounded if there is a bounded operatoronsuch that. A familyof operatorsis-bounded ifis-bounded up to a uniformly bounded constant for all sequences. Similarly we may defineandfamilies of operators. We shall give in Section3.2below a few examples related to Riesz-Schur transforms. The following result is classical, see Lemma 4.2 in[16].

If a setis-bounded, the closure of its absolute convex hull for the point-weak topology is-bounded with the same constant. The same holds for-bounded or-bounded families of operators.

Letbe a family of disjoint sets in. Assume that the sequence of Schur multiplierswith symbolis completely unconditional onfor(in the strongest sense). Using the noncommutative Khintchine inequalities, we get for

The result below is straightforward and follows from the definitions above.

Letbe an-bounded family of operators with constant. Then for any sequence of Schur multipliersinand any sequencesatisfying (1.2), the symbol

defines a Schur multiplier onwith complete norm bounded by.

SECTION: 2.Square function inequalities

In this section we prove the dimension-free estimates for Riesz-Schur transforms in Theorem A. As explained in the Introduction, our proof does not follow any of the standard approaches from harmonic analysis or probability theory. Then, we shall recall equivariant versions which show how to recover the trigonometric Riesz transform estimates from[19]in the amenable case.

SECTION: 2.1.Riesz-Schur transforms

We start with an easy transference argument. We use the usualfunction (with) and fix the constant.

Letbe a probability measure space. Then, the following norm equivalence holds infor anyand any familyof real-valued measurable functions on

Proof.It suffices to assumeis finitely supported. Since

it suffices to check the pointwise equivalence for all. This follows from the complete boundedness of the Hilbert transform as a Schur multiplier after a suitable row/column permutation. This completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem A.By approximation we can clearly assume thatis finite, sayand let. Assume for the moment thatand consider its gaussian functor. Sinceis a gaussian variable with-normwe have (assuming) that

Letand consider

Then we use the identity

and Lemma2.1forto deduce (RS1). Indeed, we have

The same holds for the-norm and (RS1) follows for. When, we use the noncommutative Khintchine inequality in Theorem1.1, followed by Lemmas1.2and2.1. The use of Lemma1.2produces the asymmetry in the constants in the statement of Theorem A. The proof of (RS1) is complete forand for the general case, letbeas a real Hilbert space with scalar product. Letbe the trivial complexification of. Its norm is made so that forwe get. The mapgiven byforis a well-defined-linear map with bound. This gives (RS1) for(loosing a factorin the constant) since it holds forandis homogeneous.

Let us now consider the lower estimate (RS2). If the matrixis supported by, then the estimate follows by duality. Indeed, we know from (RS2) that the maps defined by

have normsrespectively. Given a pairand using the duality bracket (1.1) forand, we deduce the following identity

with the support assumption. Taking the sup over allin the unit-ball gives. The general case follows by the triangular inequality. One can also note that the termis obtained fromby taking a conditional expectation. This completes the proof.

SECTION: 2.2.Trigonometric Riesz transforms

We start with a simple remark which will allow us to connect our estimates for Riesz-Schur transforms in Theorem A to the dimension-free estimates for trigonometric Riesz transforms in[19]. Recall that the constantsin Theorem A are best-known so far.

Letand consider a family of contractions. Then the following inequality holds forand any family of vectorsin

The same estimate holds inwith contractionsvarying over columns.

Proof.This follows from the homogeneity and associativity of. Just note thatcan be expressed as a tensor, so that everything boils down to the boundedness of the diagonal map. The proof is complete.

We are now in position to recover some results from[19]. Whenis a locally compact group, consider an orthogonal cocycleassociated to an orthogonal action. That is,and we find the

Letbe a simple tensor in. For convenience in the statement and to match the formulation in[19], we assume thatwhenever, which is equivalent to. Then, we deduce the following estimate fordirectly from Theorem A withtogether with identities (2.1) and Lemma2.2

Whenis amenable and using[21, Theorem 1.19]and Fourier-Schur transferenceFS, one recovers that forwithwhenand any

This is the main result in[19]—the casefollows by duality. This includes nonunimodular groups, not considered in[19]. In addition, using local transference from[30]we get local forms of (2.2) for nonamenable groups.

SECTION: 3.Schur multipliers in Schatten-classes

Given an index set, the Schur multiplier with symbolis denoted by.
The cb-norm onis denoted by. Given, we recall the following well known facts

where. Indeed, the equalityfollows by duality. Consideringinstead ofgivesand the last identity comes from a conjugation with the involution.

SECTION: 3.1.New criteria for-multipliers

We start with our first criterion.

Proof of Theorem B1 i).Assume first thatand. We are using Theorem A by fixing somewith associated involution. Let us consider the following maps

Letbe the complete contraction given by homogeneity of. We have forand

Thusand the estimate follows from Theorem A. The general case follows by a standardtrick. Take as index set two disjoints copiesofand set

Then, thecorner ofequalsand the result follows.

Actually, one can provide a different proof of Theorem B1 i) in the Grothendieck inequality spirit avoiding the Khintchine inequalities but with a worst constant. We sketch it only for real Hilbert spaces and.[33, Lemma 5.5]gives thatfor gaussian variables with. Then using Lemma2.1with a duality argument as above, one gets that the Schur multiplier with symbol

has norm. We can remove theas in Krivine’s proof of the Grothendieck inequality[33, Theorem 5.6]at the price of takingof the constant.

As we have pointed in the Introduction, Grothendieck-Haagerup symbols arise from Theorem B1 i) by fixing. Of course, the constants remain uniformly bounded in that case. In the following result, we show that we can actually improve the constants when only one term vanishes in Theorem B1 i).

The symbols on

satisfy the estimatefor every.

Proof.By (3.1), it suffices to prove the statement forand. We use again the mapfrom the proof of Theorem B1 i). By (RS1), it extends to a cb-mapwith cb-norm. Letdenote the canonical basis of. It is clear that the mapis a complete isometry for all. Composing it withand using the associativity of column Hilbert spaces, we get that the map

extends to a cb-map. In addition, the mapgiven byis a contraction. By the homogeneity of, we get thatis completely bounded, asis isometric

Sinceis a complete isometry, we conclude.

An illustration of Corollary3.2is given by generalized triangular truncations on. We consider the family of Schur multipliers whose symbols are given by. This family is-bounded with constant. Indeed, takingandthe symbolsare represented by

Thus, using thetrick in the proof of Theorem B1 i) and Corollary3.2, we get-boundedness with constant. Moreover, arguing as in Corollary3.2or Remark3.7below, it follows that this is an-bounded family of operators. Applying this, one gets that the set of Schur multipliers onsatisfyingis-bounded by. Similarly, multipliers with bounded variation along columns are-bounded with constant.

Proof of Theorem B1 ii).We claim that the symbols

define cb-bounded multipliers with. Indeed, we just apply Theorem B1 i) with. Next we takeand use[21, Theorem 1.19]as usual. Considerand the vectorsfor. Defineas the pointwise product by, which exists a.e and is bounded by. Then

Therefore, the second assertion follows from the first one by approximation.

In fact, Theorem B1 ii) may be improved as follows. Given anyanda nondecreasing Lipschitz function we may consider the symbols

Then, it can be shown for

This follows by the 3-lines lemma with values inand Theorem B2 ii) below. Indeed, let us takeforand consider the operator-valued analytic functionfor some. Whenit suffices to estimate imaginary powers ofandas Schur multipliers. By standard well-know facts —see for instance[9, Lemma 1.1]— the former is dominated by the latter and we get the square of the-bound for the Schur multiplier with symbol. According to Theorem B2 ii) this givesin view of the best constants for this result[8]. This also follows by Fourier-Schur transference from the classical Mikhlin criterion for completely bounded Fourier-multipliers. On the other hand, whenwe just apply Theorem B2 ii) to obtain the bound, and (3.3) follows since the dependance inis subexponential. Moreover, a similar argument applies for-divided differences of-Hölder functions from[8, Corollary 3.4]. Namely, ifandis a nondecreasing-Hölder function the symbols

define completely-bounded multipliers for.

Although (3.3) improves Theorem B1 ii), it illustrates how Theorem B1 i) or (3.2) may be understood as a generalized Hilbert-space-valued divided difference, and other generalizations besides those in Remark3.4are conceivable.

SECTION: 3.2.Hörmander-Mikhlin-Schur multipliers

We now give a simple proof of the main results in[7,8]from Theorem A. The approach towards HMS multipliers from[8]is based an a new proof of the Hörmander-Mikhlin theorem from[19,30]which relies on Riesz transforms for fractional laplacians. Given, the Hilbert spaceis defined as the completion offor the norm

It consists of bounded continuous functions and has the property to have a dilation invariant norm. Let us first state Lemma 2.2 from[30]in a convenient way for us.

There exist a complex Hilbert spacewith a strongly continuous unitary actionand an-cocyclesuch that for anythere existssuch that

In particular, we find.

Therefore, elements indefine Toeplitz Schur multipliers thanks to Corollary3.2. Moreover, letbe a family of functions in the unit ball offor some. Then, the Schur multiplier onwith symbol

forsatisfiesfor. In fact, the family of such Schur multipliers is-bounded with the same constant since a map satisfyingcorresponds to the restriction of a Schur multiplieron. Indeed, assume thatis given by a sequence, thenis given by

According to[30, Lemma 2.3]we know that, for functions with support in a compact set not containing, the-norm is smaller than the Sobolev norm

and compactly supported functions indefine Toeplitz Schur multipliers. This is obvious though, since the Fourier transform of elements in this Sobolev space belong to. In fact, ifare functions in the unit ball ofwe get a-bounded family without any assumption on the support because

whereand. Thus the-boundedness comes from the Grothendieck-Haagerup criterion (asdoes not depend of) and we also get-boundedness with a constant independent offor every. This illustrates that the spacesare definitely larger, allowing more singularities on the symbols considered. Therefore a Hörmander-Mikhlin theorem in terms of these spaces —like the one given below— is formally stronger.

In what follows and again by approximation, we shall work with. Take. This is a Littlewood-Paley decomposition which arises as a combination of Hilbert transforms (one-dimensional Riesz transforms) that satisfies (1.2) with. Other smoother choices of Littlewood-Paley decomposition yield better constants, but we shall not consider them for the sake of simplicity on our presentation. In the following result we fixandeven and identically 1 on.

Letbe a continuous function such that

Thendefines a completely bounded Schur multiplier onfor every.

Proof.Letforand. It is clear thatforbecauseif. Consider the functions

We haveand our assumption means that. In particular, the familyis-bounded by Remark3.7. Similarly let. Thenand the same argument shows that indeed the familyis-bounded, and thus-bounded. The assertion then follows from Lemma1.4.

Proof of Theorem B2 i).The same argument with the generalized triangular projections from Remark3.3gives the Marcinkiewicz type criterion of[7]. Indeed, any multiplier of strong 1-variation along rows sits in the closure of the absolute convex hull of generalized triangular projections and the identity. Thus one can use Lemma1.3for the-boundedness and similarly for-boundedness. This argument is very close to the original one given in[7].

Proof of Theorem B2 ii).By[30, Lemma 2.2], the criterion in Theorem3.9is stronger than the main result in[8]in both the Hörmander-Mikhlin and Sobolev formulations. This already justifies Theorem B2 ii). Our argument yields worse constants but, taking a smooth Littlewood-Paley partition and Remark3.8into account, we recover the optimal behavior of constants.

Whenis another locally compact group, the results around Lemma3.6remain true in some sense[19]. Thus, the technique in this paper is also valid to recover[9, Corollary 4.5]for nonorthogonal actions, which in turn generalizes the results from[18,19].

Acknowledgement.We would like to thank Mikael de la Salle, Fedor Sukochev and Dimitry Zanin for helpful comments which have improved the presentation.

SECTION: References

Adrián M. González-PérezJavier ParcetICMAT  ICMATUniversidad Autónoma de Madrid  Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicasadrian.gonzalez@uam.esparcet@icmat.es

Jorge Pérez-GarcíaÉric RicardICMAT  LMNOConsejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas  Université de Caen Normandiejorge.perez@icmat.eseric.ricard@unicaen.fr