SECTION: Utilizing a machine-learned potential to explore enhanced radiation tolerance in the MoNbTaVW high-entropy alloy

High-entropy alloys (HEAs) based on tungsten (W) have emerged as promising candidates for plasma-facing components in future fusion reactors, owing to their excellent irradiation resistance. In this study, we construct an efficient machine-learned interatomic potential for the MoNbTaVW quinary system. This potential achieves computational speeds comparable to the embedded-atom method (EAM) potential, allowing us to conduct a comprehensive investigation of the primary radiation damage through molecular dynamics simulations. Threshold displacement energies (TDEs) in the MoNbTaVW HEA are investigated and compared with pure metals. A series of displacement cascade simulations at primary knock-on atom energies ranging from 10 to 150 keV reveal significant differences in defect generation and clustering between MoNbTaVW HEA and pure W. In HEAs, we observe more surviving Frenkel pairs (FPs) but fewer and smaller interstitial clusters compared to W, indicating superior radiation tolerance. We propose extended damage models to quantify the radiation dose in the MoNbTaVW HEA, and suggest that one reason for their enhanced resistance is subcascade splitting, which reduces the formation of interstitial clusters. Our findings provide critical insights into the fundamental irradiation resistance mechanisms in refractory body-centered cubic alloys, offering guidance for the design of future radiation-tolerant materials.

SECTION: IIntroduction

High-entropy alloys (HEAs)have attracted considerable attention for their outstanding material properties such as high strength, ductility, toughness and corrosion resistanceSenkovet al.(2010); Miracle and Senkov (2017); Senkovet al.(2018); Georgeet al.(2019); Couryet al.(2019); Senkovet al.(2019).
Moreover,tungsten (W)-basedrefractory high-entropy alloys (RHEAs)exhibit outstanding radiation resistanceWaseem and Ryu (2021); Zonget al.(2022); Wanget al.(2024).
Recent studies show minimal radiation hardening and no signs of radiation-induced dislocation loops in nanocrystalline thin films of W-basedHEAseven under high dose conditionsEl-Atwaniet al.(2019); El Atwaniet al.(2023).
Similarly, irradiated coarse-grained WTaCrV exhibits TEM-visible dislocation loops that are signifigantly smaller than in pure WEl-Atwaniet al.(2023).
Despite these findings, the fundamental mechanisms underlying this irradiation resistance remain unclear, owing to the challenges in analyzing the defect generation and evolution mechanisms at the atomic level through experimental techniques.

Themolecular dynamics (MD)method is an effective tool for simulating displacement cascade processes, defect migration behavior, and defect interactions at the atomic scaleNordlund (2019); Denget al.(2023); Liet al.(2024); Heet al.(2024); Guoet al.(2024); Liuet al.(2024); Li and Qiang (2023); Xianget al.(2024); Qiuet al.(2024).
UsingMDsimulations, Linet al.investigated delayed interstitial clustering in NiCoCrFe HEA, attributing this phenomenon to higher defect recombination efficiency and smaller interstitial loop binding energies compared to NiLinet al.(2020).
In refractorybody-centered cubic (bcc)HEAs, Chenet al.developed semi-empirical interatomic potentials to study primary radiation damage, finding thatHEAsexhibit more point defects but fewer dislocation loops compared toWChenet al.(2023); Qiuet al.(2022,2024).
In contrast, some researchers argue thatHEAs’ radiation resistance stems not from reduced primary damage via chemical disorder but rather from longer-time defect evolutionDeluigiet al.(2021).
Hence, there remains a lack of understanding regarding how chemical composition affects primary radiation damage.

This far, the majority of primary damage simulations have been conducted usingembedded-atom method (EAM)potentials.
However, the limited accuracy of such traditional interatomic potentials with fixed functional forms forMDsimulations often leads to challenges in simulating certain properties, such as the melting point, surface energies, and the energetics and structures of vacancy clusters, self-interstitial clusters, and
dislocationsWanget al.(2019); Byggmästaret al.(2020); Liuet al.(2023).
Recent advancements inmachine-learned potentials (MLPs)have enhanced the description of complex alloy systems such as Mo-Nb-Ta-W and Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W, revealing critical insights into their segregation behaviors and defect dynamicsLiet al.(2020); Byggmästaret al.(2021).
Using thetabulated Gaussian approximation potential (tabGAP)modelByggmästaret al.(2021,2020)for Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W, Weiet al.investigated the effects of lattice and mass mismatch on primary radiation damage and high-dose defect accumulationWeiet al.(2023,2024).
While these studies provide valuable insights, they primarily focus on lower recoil energies and do not offer a comprehensive investigation of primary radiation damage across a broader spectrum of energies.

In experimental and computer simulation studies, quantifying the displacement damage caused by energetic particle interactions in materials is important.
TheNorgett-Robinson-Torrens displacements per atom (NRT-dpa)modelNorgettet al.(1975), currently the international standard for quantifying radiation damage, has several limitations, such as overestimating the number of stable defects and underestimating the amount of atomic mixing caused by cascadesNordlundet al.(2018a).
Theathermal recombination corrected displacements per atom (arc-dpa)model extendsNRT-dpamodel to consider the major damage recombination and atomic mixing effects introduced by heat spikesNordlundet al.(2018b).
However, these models do not account for the effects of alloying elements’ concentrations, radii, and masses on collisions when predicting damage in alloy materials.

In this paper, we propose extended damage models that provide more physically realistic descriptions of primary radiation damage in multi-component materials.
Subsequently, we utilize theneuroevolution potential (NEP)approachFanet al.(2021,2022); Songet al.(2024)to develop aMLPmodel for Mo-Nb-Ta-V-W using the reference data generated by Byggmästaret al.Byggmästaret al.(2021,2020).
TheNEPmodel we constructed achieves a computational speed ofatom-step/second with a single RTX 4090 GPU, which is comparable to theEAMpotential.
We report the results of a comprehensive investigation ofthreshold displacement energies (TDEs)in pure metals and MoNbTaVWHEAusingMDsimulations.
Additionally, we conduct a series of displacement cascade simulations in MoNbTaVWHEAandWfor the energy ofprimary knock-on atom (PKA)ranging from 10 to 150 keV to compare the differences in the generation and clustering of point defects.
Furthermore, we performed 50 cascade simulations at thePKAenergy of 150 keV to investigate the effect of different initial atom types.
With extended damage models andMDresults, we explain how chemical composition affects primary radiation damage.
The present study of primary radiation damage in MoNbTaVWHEAoffers a fundamental understanding of the irradiation-resistance mechanisms inbccalloys.

SECTION: IIMethodologies

SECTION: II.1Extending damage models for multicomponent materials

Kinchin and Pease (KP)established an early framework fordisplacements per atom (dpa)by accounting for the number of displaced atoms as a function of energyKinchin and Pease (1955). This model is represented by the following equation:

Here,represents the initial kinetic energy, anddenotes the energy transferred during a collision.represents the number of displaced atoms corresponding to energy. Considering that different types of atoms have distinct(TDEs), we introduceto describe the number of displaced atoms when atoms of typesandcollide.

represents the number of displaced atoms produced by an atom of typewith energy. When two atoms collide, the maximum energy that can be transferred is. The average number of displaced atoms denoted by,

whereandrepresent the masses of atomsandrespectively.represents the differential cross-section for energy transfer, whileis the total scattering cross-section. Based on the fundamental assumptions of theKPmodel, the energy transfer cross-section is determined by the hard sphere model. For hard sphere collisions,

thus simplifying the expression for the average number of displaced atoms,, to:

Similarly,

Hence,

whererepresents the probability of an atom of typebeing the target atom,represents the concentration, andrepresents the atomic radius. Through a change of integration variables, we can derive the following expression:

Clearly, when the system consists of a single atom type, the equation10simplifies to:

Solving this equation yields,

whererepresents a constant. Consequently, we hypothesized thathas a linear relationship with respect toin equation10, and this hypothesis can be verified by substituting into the equation. Taken together, we propose a modified defect production model:

In light of the above derivation, we define the effective threshold energy as follows:

represents theTDEof multicomponent materials for aPKAof type. Similarly, we can derive theNRT-dpamodelNorgettet al.(1975):

Here,represents the damage energy, which is the kinetic energy available for creating atomic displacements. The damage energy for a single ion is determined by subtracting the energy lost to electronic interactions, such as ionization, from the total ion energy. Thearc-dpamodelNordlundet al.(2018b)can be extended as:

with the functiongiven by:

SECTION: II.2Machine-learned potential

We utilized the alloy training data set from Ref.Byggmästaret al.,2021and all pure metal structures from Ref.Byggmästaret al.,2020.
Figure1(a) shows the distribution of the training dataset in thetwo-dimensional (2D)principal component (PC)space of the descriptor.
The dataset includes elastically distorted unit cells ofbcc, high-temperaturebcccrystals, structures containing vacancies and self-interstitial atoms, surfaces, liquids, and ordered alloys, totaling 21 672 structures and 334 858 atoms.
These structures ensure that theMLPcan accurately simulate the elastic, thermal, and defect properties, as well as surface energetics, the melting process, and the structure of the liquid phase.
For detailed information on the strategy for constructing the training structures and thedensity-functional theory (DFT)calculations, please refer to Refs.Byggmästaret al.,2020,2021.

TheNEPmodelFanet al.(2021,2022)with the NEP4 flavorSonget al.(2024)for Mo-Nb-Ta-V-WHEAwas trained using thegpumdpackageFanet al.(2017).
Figure1(b)-(d) compare the predicted energy, force, and virial values by theNEPmodel and those from quantum-mechanicalDFTcalculations for the training set.
Theroot-mean-square errors (RMSEs)of energy, force, and virial for theNEPmodel are 4.37 meV/atom, 145 meV/Å, and 47.8 meV/atom, respectively.
Moreover, with a single RTX 4090 GPU, thisNEPmodel achieves a computational speed ofatom-step/second and can simulate about 8 million atoms, which is sufficient for the computational efficiency required for cascade simulations.

The major hyperparameters in the NEP4 model are chosen as follows. The cutoff radii for both the radial and angular descriptor components are 5 Å.
For both the radial and angular descriptor components, there are 7 radial functions, each being a linear combination of 9
Chebyshev-polynomial-based basis functions with trainable expansion coefficients.
The loss function is a weighted sum of theRMSEsof energy, force, and virial with relative weights of 1, 1, and 0.1, respectively.Ziegler-Biersack-Littmark (ZBL)potentials for all the species and their pairs are added on top of theNEPmodel based on theNEP-ZBLschemeLiuet al.(2023), using the parameters from Ref.Byggmästaret al.,2021.
The number of neurons in the hidden layer of the neural network is.
All other parameters are set to the default values.
The training and validation results for this model are publicly accessible at the Zenodo repositoryLiu (2024).

SECTION: II.3Molecular dynamic simulations

TheMDsimulations of collision cascades were performed using the GPUMD packageFanet al.(2017).
The MoNbTaVWHEAsimulation cell was constructed by creating an equimolar, random mixture of Mo, Nb, Ta, V, and W elements within a definedbcccrystal structure.
To prepare the system for initiating a cascade, we equilibrate it under the isothermal-isobaric ensemble for 30 ps, with a target temperature of 300 K and a target pressure of 0 GPa. All three directions are treated as periodic.
High-energy particles are created at the center of the simulation box.
ThePKAenergies, numbers of simulation steps, box lengths and numbers of atoms, are presented in Table1.
The initial momenta of high-energy particles are chosen to be in the high-index directionto avoid the channeling effect.
Atoms within a thickness ofof the boundaries of the simulation boxes are maintained at 300 K using the Nose-Hoover chain thermostatMartynaet al.(1992).
The integration time step is dynamically determined so that the fastest atom can move at most 0.015 Å  within one step, with an upper limit of 1 fs also set.
Electronic stoppingNordlund (1995)was applied as a frictional force on atoms with a kinetic energy over 10 eV, using data from the SRIM-2013 codeZiegleret al.(2010); Ziegler (2013).
Each simulation was run 10 times except for the cascade simulations ofHEAswithwhich were performed 50 times to investigate the impact of differentPKAtypes.

AllTDE() calculations were performed with theNEPmodel at 300 K.
The simulation box was asupercell containingatoms.
We sampled 500 random recoil directions in pure metals and 1000 random recoil directions per element in theHEAto obtain a converged average () at 300 K.
The simulation methods are similar to the cascade simulations described above, with adaptive time step and cooling down by one lattice atomic layer at boundaries.
The atom in the center of the system is selected as thePKAand given an initial velocity in a random direction.
Displacement simulations (6 ps) with with increasing recoil energies (increment 2 eV) were performed until a stableFrenkel pair (FP)is formed.
’FP’ refer to pair of interstitial and vacancy identified using the Wigner-Seitz cell method.
Then, theofPKAis decreased by 1 eV to determine the final.
Before every new random crystal direction was sampled, we randomly shifted the simulation system to obtain a new chemical environment for the recoil event.
Due to the low energy, no electronic stopping was used in these simulations.

We used theovitopackageStukowski (2009)for defect analysis and visualization.
Interstitials and vacancies were identified using the Wigner-Seitz cell method. Defects were clustered using a cutoff radius set between the second- and third-nearest neighbors for vacancies, and between the third and fourth for interstitials.
Furthermore, the sizes of the defect clusters in this study were determined based on the net defect count, which results from the difference between the numbers of interstitials and vacancies.

SECTION: IIIResults

SECTION: III.1Material properties

Table2lists basic properties of pure metals and theHEAas calculated by theNEPmodel, and compares these to experimental andDFTdata from literature.
TheNEPmodel shows a satisfactory agreement in the predictions of energies, lattice parameters, and bulk moduli.
For theHEA, these properties are determined as averages from 50 relaxed systems, each containing 2000 atoms.
Static calculations were carried out usingaseLarsenet al.(2017).
The results indicate that W and Mo are elastically the stiffest, and alloying them with softer metals leads to a corresponding reduction in elastic stiffness.
The melting point was calculated using the solid-liquid coexistence methodLuoet al.(2004).
Bi-phase systems containing 13,500 atoms, with half of the atoms in the liquid phase and the other half in the solid bcc phase, were simulated at temperatures near the melting point, with pressures maintained at 0 GPa.
It should be noted that our simulations provide only a single point on the phase diagram between the solidus and liquidus for theHEA.

The results for averageare shown in Table2.
Among pure metals, W has the highestTDE, followed by Mo, while V atoms are the easiest to displace from perfect lattice positions.
This trend is consistent with the formation energies of interstitials in pure metals.
Moreover, theTDEsof W and Mo are distributed across a broader range of values, as shown in Figure2(f).
In contrast, the distributions for the other metals are more symmetric, particularly for V.
The averagein MoNbTaVWHEAis lower than that of pure metals.
Figure3illustrates theTDEmaps of the fivePKAtype in MoNbTaVWHEA.
TheTDEvalues for the fivePKAtypes are: V 58, Nb 53, Mo 54, Ta 45, and W 45.
These values appear to be inversely proportional to the atomic masses ofPKAs.
In a total of 2500 recoil directions sampled, the probability of each type of atom forming stable defects was as follows: V, 85%; Nb, 3%; Mo, 9%; Ta, 0.6%; W, 2.4%.
This is consistent with Ref.Byggmästaret al.,2021, which reports the trend of V-containing dumbbells having the lowest formation energies and attributes this to V being the smallest atom, thereby preferring shorter interatomic bonds compared to other elements.
Figure3(f) shows the distribution ofTDEfor MoNbTaVWHEA.
Compared to pure metals, the distributions are closer in shape to a Gaussian-type distribution and exhibits less dependence on angle.
This is partly due to lattice distortions inHEAs, which make the local atomic environment more uniform.
Overall, the results are generally consistent with a systematic study focusing onTDEsByggmästaret al.(2024)using thetabGAPmodel, particularly in the MoNbTaVWHEA.
However, the average value for pure Mo is a bit higher, which may be attributed to differences in the model and the temperature.
This is worthy of further investigation.

SECTION: III.2Frenkel pair generation and evolution

Figure4shows the average number ofFPsthat survived at the final stage of the cascade simulation in both the MoNbTaVWHEAsand pure W withPKAenergies ranging from 1 to 150 keV at 300 K.
We use thearc-dpamodelNordlundet al.(2018b)to quantify the amount of displacement damage.
The values ofare listed in Table2. The damage energy () for a single ion is given by the total ion energy minus the energy lost to electronic interactions.
For pure W,andNordlundet al.(2018b).
The number of survivingFPsobtained by theNEPmodel increases gradually with increasingPKAenergy and presents two energy regimes.
In the lower energy regions, the number ofFPsis consistent with thearc-dpamodel, whereas in the higher energy regions, it significantly exceeds the predictions of thearc-dpamodel.
The existence of an inflection point, as reported by Setyawanet al.Setyawanet al.(2015), is attributable to the two regimes of energy dependence for defect production in metals.

Compared to pure W, theHEAexhibits a higher number ofFPsacross the entire considered energy range.
Based on theTDEvalues for the fivePKAtypes,eV as calculated from Eq.14.
Under the extended damage models, atoms in MoNbTaVW are harder to displace than predicted by the initial damage models, but this has only a minor influence.
This is attributed to the similar radii and concentrations of the atoms in the MoNbTaVWHEA, where, except for V, the atomic masses are heavier.
Such results indicate that there is no significant suppression of point defects in theHEA.
We fitarc-dpaparameters for the MoNbTaVWHEA,and, based onMDsimulation data.
This extendedarc-dpamodel can accurately predict the number ofFPs, consistent withMDresults, and yields more physically realistic parameters.

SECTION: III.3Defect clustering

The detailed size distributions of the interstitial and vacancy clusters obtained at 100 keV and 150 keVPKAenergies in W andHEAare compared in Fig.5.
In MoNbTaVWHEA, vacancy clusters tend to form smaller clusters, possibly influenced by the binding energy of vacanciesWeiet al.(2024), but there is an overall promotion of vacancy cluster formation.
This phenomenon is similar to that observed in the displacement cascade simulations of W-Ta-Cr-V conducted by Chenet al.Chenet al.(2023).
However, it is evident that smaller and fewer interstitial clusters are produced in theHEAand remain more isolated instead of efficiently clustering in tungsten.
For a clearer analysis of the differences, we performed a statistical analysis of the data at 100 keV and 150 keVPKAenergies, including the average number of point defects, the average number of clusters, the sizes of the largest vacancy and interstitial clusters, and the percentage of vacancies and interstitials in clusters. All clusters considered contain three or more vacancies and four or more interstitials, as listed in Table3.
As shown in Table3, moreFPsare formed and more vacancy clusters are observed in theHEA, but the percentage of vacancies in clusters only slightly increases.
In contrast, the number of interstitial clusters and the percentage of interstitials in clusters both significantly decreased in theHEA.
Overall, compared to pureW, the formation of defect clusters in theHEAis suppressed.
It is noted that although the number and sizes of interstitial clusters are small overall, large-sized interstitial clusters are still formed directly in theHEAat 150 keVPKAenergies.
However, out of fifty simulations, only two interstitial clusters larger than 100 were observed.

SECTION: III.4Effect of PKA element

At 150 keVPKAenergies, we conducted 50 cascade simulations in the MoNbTaVWHEAto investigate the impact of differentPKAtypes.
Each element was selected as thePKA10 times, and the statistical data are presented in Table4.
Significant subcascade splitting was observed, particularly in simulations with V or Nb as thePKA.
This phenomenon occurred in all 10 simulations for these elements.
Mo as thePKAalso exhibited subcascade splitting but displayed an unfragmented peak damage state in only one of the simulations.
When W and Ta are selected asPKAs, subcascade splitting still occurred in half the instances.
At the same energies, no subcascade splitting is observed in tungsten, consistent with the subcascade splitting threshold for self-ions near 160 keV as determined by the analysis ofbinary collision approximation (BCA)cascadesBackeret al.(2016).

Compared to the more common subcascade splitting cases, the unfragmented peak damage state leads to an increase in the percentage of vacancies within clusters, while the number of vacancy clusters decreases, resulting in fewer but larger vacancy clusters.
Large interstitial clusters are accompanied by the formation of large-sized vacancy clusters, resulting in a significant increase in the percentage of interstitials in clusters.
Figure6shows snapshots of cascades at the peak and final damage states, induced by different atomicPKA, which correspond to the largest interstitial clusters formed.
In subcascade splitting cases, most point defects are isolated and dispersed rather than clustered.
Conversely, unfragmented cases exhibit defect clustering and require a longer time to reach the thermal spike.

Figure7presents the cascade process induced by different atomicPKAs, accounting for the number ofFPsas a function of simulation time.
Each point is the average of 10 independent cascade simulations, all lasting about 100 ps.
Heavier atoms selected asPKAsgenerated moreFPsat the thermal spike, but fewer survivingFPsafter recombination.
The unfragmented heat spike resulted in the formation of large molten regions, which leading to the formation of large clusters, significantly increased the number ofFPswhen cluster sizes exceeded 100 defects.
However, when only small and medium-sized clusters were produced, it also promoted the recombination of interstitials and vacancies, ultimately resulting in a decrease in the number ofFPs.
For Mo, although the unfragmented peak damage state occurred only once, it led to formation of large clusters.
This instance resulted in an increased average number ofFPsat both the peak and final states, as well as a higher percentage of interstitials in clusters.
For W and Ta, longer lifetime of the thermal spike promoted the recombination of interstitials and vacancies.
When Ta is selected asPKAs, the production of a large interstitial cluster exceeding 200 defects results in a higher average number of survivingFPsthan for WPKAs.
In summary, we found that cascade splitting significantly suppresses cluster formation while also hindering defect recombination, leading to the generation of more isolated and dispersed point defects.

SECTION: IVDiscussion

Setyawanet al.Setyawanet al.(2015)reported two regions of energy dependence for defect generation in metals.MDsimulations were conducted withPKAenergies ranging from 1 to 100 keV in tungsten, using a power-law exponent to characterize the number of Frenkel pairs produced within each region.
Setyawanet al.proposed that the intersection of two fitted lines represents the transition energy, marking both the morphological transition of cascades and the onset of large interstitial cluster formation.
Fuet al.Fuet al.(2019)employed the same function to investigate this dependence in pure W, 5 at.% Re, and 10 at.% Re alloys:

whereis the number ofFPs,(keV) is thePKAenergy, andandare fitting parameters.
For ourWresults, the parameters areandin the lower energy region, while in higher energy regions they areand.
These values are close to previous resultsSetyawanet al.(2015); Fuet al.(2019), though the pre-factor is slightly lower because previous studies did not consider electronic stopping.

For theHEA, no evident difference in energy dependence is observed, withand.
Combining the results ofMDsimulations, we attribute this phenomenon to the suppression of interstitial clusters formation.
In lower energy regions, existing studiesLinet al.(2020); Weiet al.(2024); Chenet al.(2023); Qiuet al.(2024)have identified higher defect recombination efficiency and smaller interstitial loop binding energies as the primary reasons for this suppression.
In higher energy regions, we suggest that subcascade splitting, beginning at tens of keVPKAenergies, leads to most interstitials being isolated and dispersed rather than clustered.
Especially when lighter atoms are selected as thePKA, subcascade splitting is more likely to occur, and forming interstitial clusters directly becomes nearly impossible, even at high energies.
In the alloy, the decline in material properties is primarily due to mobile interstitial clusters reacting with each other to form more complex dislocation networks.
Compared to interstitial clusters, vacancy clusters are more difficult to move, and studies have shown that the overlap of a cascade with a vacancy-type defect decreases the number of new defectsFellmanet al.(2019).
Therefore, the sharp reduction in interstitial clusters, driven by the combined effects of smaller interstitial loop binding energies and subcascade splitting, is key to the radiation resistance in high-entropy alloys.

Based on the extended damage model and theMDresults, lighter alloying elements play a crucial role in the radiation resistance of high-entropy alloys.
These elements not only increase the difficulty of atomic displacement, but also decrease the energy transfer cross-section, thereby promoting the occurrence of cascade splitting.
It is noted that large-sized interstitial clusters have been directly observed in the MoNbTaVWHEAwith 150 keVPKAenergies, consistent with experimental results from irradiated coarse-grained WTaCrVEl-Atwaniet al.(2023).
However, no signs of radiation-induced dislocation loops have been observed in nanocrystalline thin films of W-basedHEAsEl-Atwaniet al.(2019); El Atwaniet al.(2023).
The role of grain boundaries hence deserves further investigation.

SECTION: VConclusion

We proposed extended damage models for multicomponent systems, and performed a systematic computational study of primary radiation damage in MoNbTaVWHEAsand pure tungsten.
The extended models demonstrated that lighter elements increase the difficulty of atomic displacement.
An efficient machine-learned interatomic potential for the MoNbTaVW quinary system was constructed, achieving computational speeds comparable to theEAMpotential and enabling large-scaleMDsimulation.
Using results fromMDsimulations, we fitted the parameters of the extendedarc-dpamodel to accurately predict the number ofFPs.
Further investigations intoPKAtypes at 150 keV recoil energy reveal that the promotion of subcascade splitting is a key mechanism for enhancing radiation damage resistance inHEAs.
Combining the extended damage model and theMDresults, it is evident that lighter alloying elements play a special role in enhancing the radiation resistance ofHEAs.
This study provides critical guidance for the design of alloy compositions and enhances our insight into radiation tolerance mechanisms in high-entropy alloys.

Data availability

The training and validation results for the NEP model can be freely available from the Zenodo repositoryhttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13948627. Other data presented in this paper are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

SECTION: References