SECTION: On an Analytical Inversion Formula for the Modulo Radon Transform
This paper proves a novel analytical inversion formula for the so-called modulo Radon transform (MRT), which models a recently proposed approach to one-shot high dynamic range tomography.
It is based on the solution of a Poisson problem linking the Laplacian of the Radon transform (RT) of a function to its MRT in combination with the classical filtered back projection formula for inverting the RT.
Discretizing the inversion formula using Fourier techniques leads to our novel Laplacian Modulo Unfolding - Filtered Back Projection algorithm, in short LMU-FBP, to recover a function from fully discrete MRT data.
Our theoretical findings are finally supported by numerical experiments.

SECTION: Introduction
Computerized tomography (CT) deals with the recovery of the interior of scanned objects from given X-ray measurements taken at different views.
By design, the detector’s dynamic range is limited leading to saturation artifacts in the reconstruction of high-contrast objects.
The goal of increasing the dynamic range points towards the recent topic of high dynamic range (HDR) tomography.
Inspired by consumer HDR photography, typical multi-exposure approaches combine several low dynamic range measurements into a single image with increased dynamic range.
To avoid the drawback of manual calibration of the detector for each exposure, an automated calibration approach is proposed in.
Unfortunately, multi-exposure approaches suffer from the same difficulties as HDR photography: ghosting artifacts due to movements of the investigated object; increased acquisition time; unknown detector’s sensor response necessary for satisfactory image fusion.
Furthermore, the mentioned approaches are solely based on empirical experiments lacking mathematical recovery guarantees.

As opposed to this, inspired by the Unlimited Sampling (US) framework, a recently introduced single-exposure approach based on a co-design of hardware and algorithms allows for mathematically backed recovery strategies for HDR CT.
Here, instead of truncating measurements that exceed the dynamic range, these are folded into the limited range of the detector via a modulo operation implemented in hardware.
Thereon, these folded measurements are unfolded algorithmically.
Mathematically, this can be modeled by the so-called modulo Radon transform (MRT), which concatenates the modulo operation with the well-known Radon transform (RT), yielding a nonlinear reconstruction problem.
Albeit algorithmic recovery strategies exist, an explicit inversion formula for the MRT is still missing.
In this work, we address this point by proposing an analytical inversion formula for the MRT, that combines the solution of a Poisson equation to unfold the modulo operation with the well-known filtered back projection (FBP) formula to invert the RT.
The formulation of the Poisson equation is inspired by an approach to the classical phase unwrapping problem in.
By discretizing our analytical inversion formula, we deduce the novel LMU-FBP algorithm for recovering a target from MRT data, which operates simultaneously on the angle and radial variable in contrast to the US-FBP algorithm.
Moreover, our inversion formula does not require bandlimited Radon data so that LMU-FBP does not rely on bandlimitedness as opposed to.

The paper starts with an overview of the MRT in §.
This is followed by our main theoretical result: the deduction of the Poisson equation with suitable boundary conditions in §and the proof of the analytical inversion in §.
Finally, we present our LMU-FBP algorithm in §and showcase numerical experiments with non-bandlimited test cases in §including a comparison with US-FBP.

SECTION: Modulo Radon Transform
For, we define its(RT)via

Moreover, for, we define itsvia

Note thatis injective onand, forwith integrable Fourier transform, the inversion ofis given by the classical

which holds pointwise for all.
The FBP formula (), however, requires exact knowledge ofand, in particular, saturation effects due to range limitations lead to severe artefacts in the reconstruction.
To circumvent this, inthe followingis introduced, which foldsinto a given range intervalwith.

Forandthe(MRT)is defined as

whereis thewith.

In, it is shown thatis injective on the spaceof bandlimited integrable functions with bandwidthfor anyand on the spaceof continuous functions with compact support, which implies the invertibility ofon suitable spaces.
An analytical inversion formula, however, is not known so far.
In the following sections, we take steps towards closing this gap by first relating the Laplacian oftoand, afterwards, showing unique solvability of the corresponding Poisson problem.
This in combination with the FBP formula () then gives a new analytical inversion formula forunder suitable assumptions.

SECTION: Poisson Problem for the Modulo Radon Transform
Relating the Laplacian oftovia a Poisson problem is inspired byfrom the context of phase unwrapping.
Letsuch thatis twice continuously differentiable on.
Furthermore, letbe the modulo threshold.
Then, the Laplacian ofcan be computed as

and, thereon, for the Laplacian offollows that

Observe thatcan be decomposed pointwise intoand a piecewise constant residual function with values in, i.e.,

Here,denotes an arbitrary index set such thatis covered by the pairwise disjunct sets, and the coefficientsare integers.
Exploiting the-periodicity of the sine and cosine function in () results in the

To computefrom given, we aim to solve the Poisson equation ().
For this, we restrict the domain ofto a bounded rectangle and impose boundary conditions.
Note that, for applications like CT, it is reasonable to assume that the functionis compactly supported.
Hence, in the following, lethave compact support in the open unit ball.
As the compact support oftransfers to, we obtainfor all.
Consequently, we assumeas in,and extendby zero if needed.
On the restricted Lipschitz domain, the RTcan be represented as

with.
With this,satisfies homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions on,
wheredenotes the boundary of.
Furthermore,is-periodic with respect to.
Letalso be continuously differentiable with respect to the first argument on.
Then,and its first partial derivative with respect tohave to satisfy-periodic boundary conditions on.
Altogether,has to fulfill the

In total, by abbreviating the right-hand side in () as

and setting,, we obtain the

SECTION: Analytical Inversion of the Modulo Radon Transform
The solution of the boundary value problem () enables the inversion of the modulo operation.
To guarantee the existence of a unique solution, we employ certain periodic function spaces.
A periodic function is defined on the torussuch that opposite points are identified with each other, analogously to.
With this, theis defined as

with norm

while identifying functions which agree almost everywhere on.
Letanddenote the first weak partial derivative with respect toand, respectively.
Then, theonis defined as

with

Furthermore, we define the subspacethat encodes homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions on a part of the boundary as the closure

of the spaceof periodic smooth functions vanishing in a neighborhood of

Employing standard arguments, the well-known Poincaré inequality can be adapted to the setting of.

Due to space limitations, we omit the proof.
Instead, we now formulate our main theoretical result: an analytical inversion formula for the MRT.

For the proof of the Theorem, we first show that the Poisson problem () admits a unique weak solution.
To this end, we deduce a weak formulation of the boundary value problem, where our calculations are inspired byand.
Assume that,and.
Then,is a classical solution to the boundary value problem in ().
Analogously to, we periodizewith respect to, since the values on the opposing boundary partsandagree due to the Dirichlet conditions in ().
Consequently, multiplying the Poisson equation () with a test functionand applying Green’s first identity results in

where the integral along the boundary vanishes.
To see this, we use that the test functionis periodic and vanishes in a neighborhood of, as well as the condition that the partial derivativeis-periodic with respect to.
Finally, we enlarge the set of test functions toto obtain the desired weak formulation:
For, a functionis called ato the Poisson problem () if

holds for all.

We follow a standard approach based on the classical Lax-Milgram theorem, see e.g.,.
To this end, we first define the bilinear formvia

Due to the Poincaré inequality, Proposition, the mappingis an inner product onand the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies the continuity ofby

Furthermore, the Poincaré inequality guarantees the existence ofsuch that

This shows the coercivity ofon.
Secondly, we define the linear formby

Again, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies the continuity ofby

Consequently, all requirements of the Lax-Milgram theorem are satisfied, and there exists a uniquesuch that

is satisfied for all, i.e.,is the unique weak solution to the Poisson problem ().
Furthermore, the coercivity ofand the continuity ofimply that

and, thus, dividing bygives the stability estimate ().∎

Using the unique weak solution in Lemma, we can now prove our main theorem.

In the first step, we invert the modulo operator by showing that the equation

holds pointwise on.
Sinceby assumption, the functionis square-integrable.
Moreover, sinceis periodic with respect toand, after periodization, also periodic with respect to,is periodic onand, thus,.
Hence, Lemmaimplies the existence of a unique weak solutionto the Poisson problem ().
It remains to argue thatandcoincide.
By assumption, we haveand, hence,.
Furthermore,satisfies the Poisson equation () and the boundary conditions ().
Following the deduction of (),is also a weak solution of () and, due to the uniqueness of the weak solution, it follows that.
Consequently, the continuity ofimplies that () holds pointwise choosing the continuous representative.

In the second step, we need to invert the Radon operator.
Sinceandby assumption, the filtered back projection formula () holds pointwise onand, consequently, the explicit inversion formula () for the MRT follows by combining () with (). ∎

SECTION: Numerical Inversion of the Modulo Radon Transform
We approximate the analytical inversion formula () numerically by solving the Poisson problem () with Fourier techniques to invert the modulo operation and applying the well-known discrete FBP algorithm to invert the RT.
This combines into our novel(LMU-FBP) Algorithm, which we now explain in more detail.

The MRT is discretized using parallel beam geometry, where, due to the evenness of, it suffices to consider the domain.
For this, letand set.
Moreover, letbe the radial sampling rate.
Then,is discretized by evaluating at the grid points,, and,, resulting in the discrete MRT data

Inspired by, in the first(LMU) stage of Algorithmwe invert the modulo operator numerically by solving the Poisson equation () using discrete Fourier transforms.
This is based on the observation that, under suitable assumptions, the Laplacian of a functioncan be computed via

To incorporate the boundary conditions (), the MRT data is extended:
In Step, the MRT data is extended into the intervalsuch that it becomes-periodic.
For this, the evenness property ofis employed.
To ensure the homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, in Step, the MRT data is extended insuch that it becomes odd around.
Using the discrete Fourier transform () and its inverse (), the discrete version of the right-hand side of the Poisson equation () is computed in Step.
Finally, in Step, the Poisson equation is solved numerically and the LMU solutionis found in Stepby restricting to the original index set.

In the second(FBP) stage of Algorithmwe apply the discrete FBP algorithm to numerically invert the RT.
This is based on the approximate FBP reconstruction formula

where a low-pass filtersatisfyingwith an even windowsupported inand bandwidthis incorporated to deal with the ill-posedness of the Radon inversion.
The approximate FBP forumla () is discretized using a standard approach, cf., involving the discrete convolution in Stepfollowed by the discrete back projection in Step, where an interpolation methodis applied to reduce the computational costs.
To this end, the discrete convolution is computed at,, for a sufficiently large index set.
The result is the LMU-FBP reconstructionin grid pointsfor index sets.

MRT datafor,;low-pass filterwith bandwidth; interpolation method

LMU-FBP reconstructionfor

In, it is proposed to apply an enhancement rounding step, which we adapt to our setting and include after the LMU stage in Algorithm.
More precisely, ouris defined as

forand.
This yields exact recovery of the Radon dataif the absolute LMU reconstruction error satisfies.
Indeed, using the modulo decomposition property () with piecewise constant residual, it is

However, if the absolute LMU reconstruction error is large, then the improvement step in () yields undesirable jumps in the recovered Radon data.

SECTION: Numerical Experiments
We now present numerical experiments to demonstrate our inversion approach.
To this end, we use the smooth phantom, depicted in Fig.(a) along with its Radon data in Fig.(d), and the classical Shepp-Logan phantomin Fig.(b), whose Radon data is shown in Fig.(e).
We also consider the open source walnut dataset, that includes realistic uncertainties arising from the tomography hardware.
In all cases, we present reconstruction results on a grid ofpixels from noisy modulo Radon projections

of noise levelin the sense thatand use the cosine filter with window functionand optimal bandwidth.
We compare our novel LMU-FBP algorithm with the US-FBP method from, which is based on Unlimited Sampling (US).
Note that US-FBP is designed for recovering bandlimited functions but it can be adapted to non-bandlimited data by manually setting the order of forward differences.
Here, we always choose orderas higher orders are observed to fail in our examples.

In our first set of proof-of-concept simulations, we consider the smooth phantom fromwith smoothness parameterso that our assumptions of Theoremare satisfied.
Hence, we expect nearly perfect reconstruction via LMU-FBP.
The simulated modulo Radon data withis shown in Fig.(a), compressing the dynamic range bytimes and corrupted by uniform noise with noise levelyielding a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of.
We use the parameter choicesandleading toso that, which guarantees that US-FBP stably recovers an-bandlimited function from MRT samples.
Although the smooth phantom is not bandlimited, we see in Fig.(b) that US-FBP nearly perfectly recovers with a structural similarity index measure (SSIM) of.
The same is true for our newly proposed LMU-FBP reconstruction scheme, see Fig.(c).

To also deal with a non-smooth test case, we now consider the classical Shepp-Logan phantom, which is piecewise constant and has jump discontinuities so that our assumptions in Theoremaresatisfied.
The simulated MRT data withis shown in Fig.(a), compressing the dynamic range by abouttimes and corrupted by uniform noise withleading to an SNR of.
In this case, we see that US-FBP introduces artefacts in the reconstruction, cf. Fig.(b), while our improved LMU+-FBP method yields a nearly perfect reconstruction with SSIM of, cf. Fig.(c).

We finally present reconstruction results for the walnut dataset from, which is transformed to parallel beam geometry withand.
Moreover, the Radon data is normalized to the dynamical range, see Fig.(c).
The corresponding FBP reconstruction is shown in Fig.(f) and serves as ground truth for comparing our reconstruction results.
Simulated modulo Radon projections withare displayed in Fig.(a), where we added uniform noise withto account for quantization errors leading to an SNR of.
The reconstruction with US-FBP is shown in Fig.(b) and with LMU-FBP in Fig.(c).
Both algorithm yield a reconstruction of the walnut that is indistinguishable from the FBP reconstruction with anofand, respectively, while compressing the dynamic range bytimes.
The results for twice radially downsampled noisy MRT data are shown in Fig.(d)-(f).
While US-FBP produces severe artefacts, LMU-FBP still gives a decent reconstruction.

SECTION: Conclusion
In this work, we proved a novel analytical inversion formula for the MRT closing a gap in the existing literature.
Discretization with Fourier techniques lead to the new LMU-FBP algorithm, which can handle non-bandlimited Radon data and performs on par or even better than US-FBP in this case.
Future work includes weakening the assumptions and analyzing recovery guarantees for discrete data.

SECTION: Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) - Project numbers 530863002 and 281474342/GRK2224/2.

SECTION: References