SECTION: A coisotropic embedding theorem for pre-multisymplectic manifolds

SECTION: Acknowledgements

I am indebted to prof. A. Ibort for making me aware of the existence of the coisotropic embedding theorem and its potential applications as well as for the huge amount of inspiring discussions of the last years.
I am also indebted to prof. G. Marmo for encouraging me to think of alternative ways to depict the geometry behind Gotay’s coisotropic embedding theorem.
I also want to thank prof. A. Zampini, F.M. Ciaglia and F. Di Cosmo for many useful discussions.
I acknowledge financial support from Next Generation EU through the project 2022XZSAFN – PRIN2022 CUP: E53D23005970006.
I am a member of the GNSGA (Indam).

SECTION: 1Introduction

Multisymplectic geometry has emerged as a fundamental framework for the geometric description of Field Theories, extending the role that symplectic geometry plays in Classical Mechanics, as testified by the huge, even if not exhaustive, list of contributions[GPR69,GPR71,Kij73,GS73,KS76,TK79,AA80,Got91a,Got91b,BSF88,GMS97,CCI91,FF03,EEMLRR96,EEMLRR00,RR09,Kru15,CDI+20b,CDI+20a,CDI+24,CDI+22b,CDI+22c](see also references therein).
In this setting, the tangent and cotangent bundles of a configuration space are replaced by the first-order jet bundle of a fibration and its dual, providing a natural arena for analyzing the equations of motion and symmetries of Field Theories.
These jet bundles are examples of pre-multisymplectic manifolds, which generalize the notion of pre-symplectic geometry to higher-degree forms.
In this framework, to any Lagrangian (or Hamiltonian), a pre-multisymplectic structure is associated, that allows for an intrinsic formulation of a variational principle providing the equations of motion of the theory.

In previous contributions[CDI+20b,CDI+20a,CDI+24,CDI+22b,CDI+22c], we showed how, at least locally close to some Cauchy hypersurface, such equations of motion can be formulated in terms of (infinite-dimensional) pre-symplectic Hamiltonian systems.
In particular, we established that the space of solutions of the equations of motion inherits a pre-symplectic structure.
The kernel of this structure descends from the kernel of the pre-multisymplectic form mentioned above and encodes the gauge symmetries of the theory.

To define a Poisson structure on the space of solutions, we employed a regularization technique based onM. Gotay’scoisotropic embedding theorem[Got82](see also[GS90]for an equivariant version of the theorem and[OP05]for a more modern approach).
Gotay’s theorem provides a powerful tool in symplectic geometry, ensuring that any pre-symplectic manifold can be embedded as a coisotropic submanifold into a symplectic manifold, referred to as itssymplectic thickening.
In[CDI+24,CDI+22b,CDI+22c], we used Gotay’s theorem to coisotropically embed the space of solutions of the equations of motion of Classical Field Theories into a symplectic manifold where a Poisson structure is canonically defined.
We then studied whether and how this Poisson structure projects back to a Poisson structure on the space of solutions.

Having in mind the previous statement that Field Theories can be locally formulated in terms of (infinite-dimensional) pre-symplectic Hamiltonian systems, the coisotropic embedding theorem has been used by the author also to provide a one-to-one correspondence between symmetries and constants of the motion[CDI+22a]and to provide a solution for the inverse problem of the calculus of variations for a class of implicit differential equations[Sch24b,Sch24a].

While effective in all the cases mentioned above, this regularization approach requires handling infinite-dimensional spaces, as the space of solutions is typically infinite-dimensional.
To circumvent the technical challenges associated with infinite-dimensional spaces, it may be useful to develop a multisymplectic analogue of Gotay’s theorem, allowing coisotropic regularization to be carried out directly at the finite-dimensional level of the underlying pre-multisymplectic manifold.

The aim of this manuscript is to prove a coisotropic embedding theorem for pre-multisymplectic manifolds.
Specifically, we will show that any pre-multisymplectic manifold can be embedded as a coisotropic submanifold into a larger multisymplectic manifold.
This generalization provides a finite-dimensional framework for coisotropic regularization and opens new avenues for the study of multisymplectic geometry and its applications to Field Theories.

It is worth pointing out that recent work has focused on the interplay between coisotropic submanifolds and multisymplectic geometry, particularly in the opposite direction taken in this manuscript, namely that of multisymplectic reduction.
In particular, in[de 24]the authors analyze coisotropic submanifolds of pre-multisymplectic manifolds and study conditions under which they inherit multisymplectic structures.

The structure of this paper is as follows.
InSection2, we recall preliminary notions about pre-multisymplectic manifolds that will be used throughout the manuscript.Section3is devoted to the statement and proof of the main theorem.

SECTION: 2Preliminaries

A-multisymplectic manifoldis a smooth differential manifoldequipped with a closed and non-degenerate differential-form.

A-pre-multisymplectic manifoldis a smooth differential manifoldequipped with a closed differential-form.

Given a multisymplectic manifoldand a submanifold, the-multisymplectic orthogonalofinatis

Evidently

and

A submanifoldof a multisymplectic manifoldis-coisotropic if.

Given a smooth differential manifold, we will denote bythe bundle of differential-forms on, namely the vector bundle overwhose typical fibre atis.
We will denote bythe canonical projection.

Given a smooth-dimensional differential manifold, we will usually denote by

a system of local coordinates on it and by

an adapted system of local coordinates on.

Consider a-pre-multisymplectic manifold.
The kernel ofis, at each, a subspace of, denoted by.
We will always assumeto have constant rank, so thatandare isomorphic for any pair.
Moreover, we will also always assume thatprovides a completely integrable distribution on111Note that the complete integrability of the distribution generated byis ensured by the closure ofonly whenbyFrobenius theorem[AMR88].so that there exists a foliation ofsuch that the tangent space to each leaf at each pointcoincides withand there exists a unique leaf passing through any point of.
The space of leaves of the foliation is the space of equivalence classes of points onbelonging to the same leaf and will be denoted by

Sometimes, we will consider ona system of local coordinates adapted to such a foliation

whereis the rank ofandis the dimension of its kernel.
The coordinatesare a system of coordinates on the space of leaves of the foliation, namely, locally each leaf is a level set of the type

whereas the coordinates(for fixed values of the’s) individuates a point on each leaf.
In this system of coordinates,reads

A complement toat eachis not canonically defined.
Indeed, each choice of a complementsuch that

amounts to the choice of aconnectionon.

Aconnectiononis an idempotent smooth-tensor field onwhose image, at each, is.

Locally a connection can be written as

where the functionsare the so-calledconnection coefficients(see, for instance[GMS10, App.]or[GMS09, Sec.]).
By means of, the tangent space toat each point splits into the direct sum of tangent vectors in the image ofand tangent vectors in the kernel of.
The image ofreads

and is usually referred to as the space ofvertical vectors, whereas the kernel reads

and is usually referred to as the space ofhorizontal vectors.
It is easy to show that under a change of local chart, the point-wise splitting into vertical and horizontal tangent vectors is preserved and, thus, the tangent bundle tosplit as the direct sum

where(resp.) is the vector subbundle ofwhose sections are, at each point, the vertical (resp. horizontal) vectors defined by.

Given any connection, there exists a related connectionwhose horizontal space coincides with the vertical space ofand vice-versa.
We will denote by

the splitting ofinduced by the connection.

The splitting generated byon vector fields induces a splitting for differential-forms on.
Indeed, given a-format some point of, it can always be written as

where

and

We will refer toandas theparallelandtransversalcomponents ofassociated with the connection.

In the system of local coordinates chosen, if one writes the-form in terms of the basis of differential-forms

dual to the basis of vertical and horizontal vectors associated to, one has

where

In this system of local coordinates, one gets

whereis a multi-indexwhere the-th component isand the sum is taken over all the multi-indices of this type.
We will denote bythe set of these multi-indices.
As for vertical and horizontal tangent vectors, it is easy to show that this splitting of-forms is stable under a change of local chart, and, thus, it defines two subbundles of.
We will denote by

the splitting of the fibre bundleinto the direct sum of the fibre subbundlesandwhose sections are parallel (resp. transversal) differential-forms with respect to.
We will denote by

a system of local coordinates onand by

a system of local coordinates on.

Analogously, by means of the connection, one can construct the splitting

where

and

In the system of local coordinates chosen

whereis a multi-indexwhere the-th component isand the sum is taken over all the multi-indices of this type.
We will denote bythe set of these multi-indices.

We will denote by

the splitting of the fibre bundleinto the direct sum of the fibre subbundlesandwhose sections are parallel (resp. transversal) differential-forms with respect to.
Clearly, if,is empty, and.

We will denote by

a system of local coordinates onand by

a system of local coordinates on.

SECTION: 3The theorem

Here, we provide the statement and the proof of the multisymplectic coisotropic embedding theorem.

SECTION: 3.1Statement

Letbe a-pre-multisymplectic manifold.
Then, there exists a multisymplectic manifold, referred to as themultisymplectic thickeningof, and an embedding, such that:

is equipped with a-multisymplectic form.

becomes a-coisotropic submanifold of.
In particular.

SECTION: 3.2Proof

Consider a-dimensional-pre-multisymplectic manifold.
In the system of coordinates adapted to the foliation induced by the kernel ofdescribed inSection2,reads:

Consider the bundledescribed inSection2, with the system of local coordinates

Consider the-form ondefined by

wherehas to be understood as a point inon the left hand side and as a (transversal)-form onon the right hand side,is the projection fromto, and.
In the system of local coordinates chosen

Consider onthe following-form

In the system of local coordinates chosen

The-formis closed by construction.

To prove whether it is also non-degenerate, we will consider its contraction along the following basis of vector fields on:

Via a direct computation one shows

whereand.
Since none of the right-hand sides of the equations above vanish, one concludes thatis non-degenerate.

Note that the caseis a "degenerate" situation, where the second line of (41) does not appear and, thus,does not vanish unless eitheror(namely, if we are in a tubular neighborhood of the zero section of).
This is, indeed, the classical coisotropic embedding theorem for pre-symplectic manifolds.

Note that the departing-pre-multisymplectic manifoldcan be embedded intoas the zero-sectionof the projection.
A straightforward computation also shows that

To show thatis coisotropic inside, let us consider a vector field tangent to

and a vector field tangent to

and let us compute

A direct computation shows that

The term involving

is independent on the others.
Thus, imposingto vanish for allforces all theto be zero.
Imposing this condition into the other terms leads to the fact that also all thevanish.
Consequently,is empty, and, thus,is trivially-coisotropic inside.

The arguments above can be iterated up to the orderto show thatis-coisotropic inside.

SECTION: Conclusions and Future Plans

This paper has established a coisotropic embedding theorem for pre-multisymplectic manifolds.
We constructed a suitable multisymplectic thickening of any given pre-multisymplectic manifold such that the original manifold can be embedded as a coisotropic submanifold.
This embedding facilitates a more accessible finite-dimensional approach to regularization techniques, which traditionally require handling infinite-dimensional spaces.

Building on these results, several directions for future research emerge.

We will apply the coisotropic embedding theorem proved to Field Theories, particularly in constructing a Poisson bracket on the space of solutions, as we already did in[CDI+24,CDI+22b,CDI+22c].
We will study the relation between the two approaches and the potential advantages of the one based on the multisymplectic coisotropic embedding theorem proved in this manuscript.

Implicit partial differential equations can often be formulated using pre-multisymplectic structures.
The regularization method introduced in this paper allows for the definition of a multisymplectic structure on an extended manifold, enabling (under some conditions that have to be studied) the formulation of an explicit PDE.
Future work will investigate:

The correspondence between solutions of the original implicit PDE and the explicit PDE on the extended manifold.

The conditions under which the integrability of the explicit PDE ensures the integrability of the original system.

The development of tools to apply this framework to specific classes of implicit PDEs, thereby improving the understanding of their geometric and analytic properties.

Several results proven by the author, including those in[CDI+22a,Sch24b,Sch24a], rely on a local formulation of Field Theories as pre-symplectic Hamiltonian systems.
Using the coisotropic embedding theorem, we aim to extend these results to global contexts by avoiding passing through the above-mentioned pre-symplectic Hamiltonian system, which is only locally defined close to some Cauchy hypersurface.

SECTION: References