SECTION: Introduction and main assertions
Letbe the set of all natural numbers and. Letbe the Euclidean-space, where. Put, whereasis the complex plane. Letwith, be the standard quasi-Banach space with respect to the Lebesgue measure in, quasi-normed by

with the natural modification if. As usual,is the set of all integers andwhere, denotes the lattice of
all pointswith. Let, where, be the set of all multi-indices,

Let as usual,,, () and,.

Letand. Thenare the classical Sobolev spaces with dominating mixed smoothness which can be equivalently normed by

They were introduced by S.M. Nikol’skij in. One may also consult the relevant parts of(first edition 1969) and. These spaces, being the dominating mixed counterpart of the classical isotropic Sobolev spaces,,, have been generalized and modified in many directions. The systematic Fourier–analytical
approach of several versions of spaces with dominating mixed smoothness of type,,and(for–spaces), being the dominating mixed counterpart of the related isotropic spaces,
goes back to H.–J. Schmeisser,(his habilitation) and can also be found in. One may also
consultfor further historical comments and references of the early history of these spaces. The
next decisive step goes back to J. Vybíral,(his PhD–theses) including atomic and wavelet representations of spaces
with dominating mixed smoothness. We returned into this topic dealing with Haar bases and Faber bases in spaces with
dominating mixed smoothness applied to numerical integration and discrepancy (number–theoretical assertions about the distribution
of points, especially in cubes in). This has been complemented in, covering pointwise multipliers and corresponding
spaces in arbitrary domains in. What follows might be considered as a further step in the theory of spaces with dominating mixed
smoothness, concentrating on mapping properties of the Fourier transform in suitable spaces. This is the dominating mixed counterpart
of related assertions for isotropic spaces obtained quite recently inand the forthcoming bookwhich
we describe now briefly.

Letwithandbe the well–known special isotropic Besov spaces
(recalled below in Definitionand Remark). Letbe the usual Schwartz space andbe its dual,
the space of tempered distributions in. Ifthen

denotes the the Fourier transform of, whereasandstand for the inverse Fourier transform given by the
right–hand side of () within place of. Heredenotes the scalar product in. Bothandare
extended toin the standard way. The mapping properties of the Fourier transform in the isotropic spaceswhich
we have in mind can be summarized as follows.(i)

(ii)

This coincides withbased on, improving preceding assertions in. It is the main
aim of the present paper to prove the following counterpart of these assertions for the special Besov spaces,,, with dominating mixed smoothness as defined below in Definitionand Remark.

In Sectionwe collect further definitions and some prerequisites. The proof of the above Theorem is shifted to Section.

SECTION: Definitions and prerequisites
Some basic notation were already introduced in Section. This applies in particular to the Fourier transform and its inverse
in the space of tempered distributionsin the Euclidean–space. We fix our use of(equivalence) as already
used in (). Letbe an arbitrary index set. Then

for two sets of positive numbersandmeans that there are two positive numbersandsuch
that

Next we recall the definition of the isotropic function spaces,, inand their dominating mixed
counterparts.

Letwith

and let

Since

theform a dyadic resolution of unity. The entire analytic functionsmake sense pointwise infor any.

We recall some well–known properties and notation. Letand. Then

are the classical Sobolev spaces equivalently normed by

including

Let

Then,

is a lift in the spaces. This means,

One has in particular

withas in (), (). The mappings in (), () are based on the special Besov spaces

including the related Hölder–Zygmund spaces

Next we describe the dominating mixed counterpart of Definitionand Remark.
Letwith

and

be the one–dimensional version of (), (), notationally complemented by. Let

Then

is the counterpart of (). Furthermorerefers to

(rectangles). Recall that the entire analytic functionsmake sense pointwise infor
any. Letif.

Letand

be the counterpart of (). Then

is a lift in the spaces. This means for alland(for–spaces)

This is the dominating mixed counterpart of (). One has, similarly as in (),

withas in (), (). The mapping properties in the above Theorem are based on the special Besov
spaces with dominating mixed smoothness

including the related Hölder–Zygmund spaces

We refer the reader tofor further equivalent quasi–norms and related references.

We rely in what follows mainly on wavelet representations and duality. Whereas duality assertions will be described later on in the
course of the arguments we give now a detailed description of wavelet expansions for all spacesaccording to Definition. We adapt corresponding assertions in, based in turn onandto our later needs.

As usual,withcollects all complex-valued continuous functions onhaving continuous bounded derivatives up to orderinclusively. Let

be real compactly supported Daubechies wavelets with

having–norms 1. Let

with,and. Let,

and

. Then

with (again)is an orthonormal basis in. Letand. Thenis the collection of all sequences

such that

andis the collection of all sequencesin () such that

with the usual modifications ifand/or, whereis the characteristic function of the rectangle

Let

SECTION: Proof of the Theorem
We break the proof of the Theorem in 10 steps.First we prove

for the Hölder–Zygmund spaces according to (). Let. We expandaccording to
Proposition,

with

where we used thatis self–dual in the context of the framework of the dual pairing,. This
possibility is not totally obvious, but we add a comment about this representability ofin Remarkbelow. Let
temporarilybe the Fourier transform on the real line. Then one obtains from () that

. One has by

and by(or by direct calculation) that

for some(independently ofand). Using in addition the duality

init follows from (), (), () that

Now one obtains () from ()–() with.Let. We justify

by complex interpolation,, of (),

and

rewritten according to () and,, as

Based on the isomorphic mappings of these spaces onto corresponding sequence spaces as described in Propositionone can
shift this task to the complex interpolation of the related sequence spaces. But then one is essentially in the same situation as
for isotropic spaces inandwith the outcome

and

where,

with. Now ()–() prove ().Let. We justify

by duality. Byone has the duality

in the framework of the dual pairingcomplemented by

Hereis the completion ofin. Recall thatis self–dual,. Then it follows by duality from (),and (), complemented by

that

This proves ().The continuity of the mapping (), () follows now from (), () and the monotonicity
of the spaceswith respect tofor fixed.We justify in three steps that the mapping in (), () withandare not compact
if eitheror. This requires some efforts. First we show that

is not compact. Byand the embedding

according toit is sufficient to prove that

is not compact. Letbe a non–trivialfunction in,

such that

and

whereandare the same functions as in the Definition. Let

Then one has for the Sobolev spaces in (), () (notationally extended to)

,. Using the monotonicity as described in, especially

it follows

One has by Definition

and

. This shows thatin () is not compact.. We prove that

is not compact. It follows from an embedding as in () that it is sufficient to show that

is not compact. One can take over the related arguments from, based on, for isotropic
spaces. Letbe a smooth compactly supported father wavelet according to (). Letwhich refers toin (). Then,,are wavelets for the isotropic spaces and also for the above spaces with dominating mixed smoothness. Let

Thenis not compact in any space,. We wish to show that
uniformly

based on (). There are two cases. One has either

or (assuming)

for one. Inserted in () one obtains (). This shows thatin () and () is not compact.The two preceding steps show thatin (),

is not compact if eitheror. The corresponding assertion forcan be obtained by duality as follows.
Letin (),

,, be compact. Then it follows from () andthat

is compact. But this is not the case if eitheror.. In the preceding steps we adapted the corresponding proofs inand the underlying paperfor related isotropic spaces to their dominating mixed counterparts. This is not possible any longer in order to justify
that the mappingin (), () is compact if bothand. Inwe relied on an
elaborated theory for weighted isotropic spaceswith suitable weights, including compact mapping properties
expressed in terms of entropy numbers, and corresponding wavelet representations. There is (as far as we know) no counterpart for
related weighted spaces. We circumvent this shortcoming and shift the problem of compactness (not of entropy numbers)
from spaces with dominating mixed smoothness to appropriate isotropic spaces. This requires again some efforts and will be done in the
present step, preparing the proof of compactness in the next step. First we follow. The class,, of admissible weight functions is the collection of all positivefunctions insuch that for alland some,

and for someand,

Both weights

according to () and

according to () (as the product of related one–dimensional weights) belong to. For these weights we introduced in(based on the references given there) the weighted spacesreplacing in Definitionthe Lebesgue
spacesbywith

It is one of the main observations thatis an isomorphic mapping ofonto,

(for–spaces). Details and references may be found in. In particular, for fixedandthe spacesare monotonically included both for the smoothnessand for related weights. There is little
doubt that there are suitable counterparts for the spacesas introduced in Definition, at least for weights
of type (). But this has not yet been done. It will be sufficient for us to introduce the spaceswithin () as the collection of allsuch that,

For fixedandthere is still the monotonicity with respect to the smoothness. But we shift the missing monotonicity with
respect to the weights to the isotropic case. This is based on the following observations. Spaces with dominating mixed smoothness
have been compared with other spaces inin detail. We refer the reader toand. For our
purpose the following specific assertions are sufficient. Let,be as in (),
() and,be as in (),
(). Let. Then

and

These are special cases of.After the preparations in Step 8 we prove now that the mappingsin (), () are compact if bothand. Letand. Then it follows from the lifting property () that

and by Step 3 that

This means in terms of the preceding Step 8, that both

and, using in addition (),

are continuous. It follows from (), () that

As mentioned in Step 8 the spacesare monotonically included with respect to the weights (for fixed). Then one
has by () that also the mapping

is continuous. Combined with the compact embedding

as a very special case of, one obtains that

is compact. By duality as already used in Step 3 (and its obvious counterpart for isotropic spaces) it follows from ()
that also

is compact. Then () (and appropriate adaption of the parameters) show that

and

are compact. This proves thatin () is compact if bothand. Application of duality again shows that also
the mapping in () is compact if bothand.It remains to prove that there are no continuous mappings as in (), () if eitheror.
Let us assume that there is a continuous mapping

By embedding it is sufficient to deal with the case. We already know that

is compact. We use the complex interpolation,, according toand the references given there. One has as a special case

. However ifin () is continuous then the interpolation () with the compact mapping
() shows that also

is compact. This follows from the interpolation theory for compact operators as described in.
But we know by Step 6 that this is not the case. This disproves that there is a continuous mapping as assumed in ().
Similarly one can argue in the other cases with. Ifthen it follows from the assumption

that also

The duality () shifts this question to the casewhich is covered by the above arguments. This shows that ()
requiresand.

SECTION: References