SECTION: Inhomogeneous transformations in a gauged twistor formulation of a massive particle
We show that the mass-shell constraints
in the gauged twistor formulation of a massive particle
given in [, 045016 (2016)]
are incorporated in an action automatically by extending
the localtransformation to its inhomogeneous extension denoted by.
Therefore it turns out that all the necessary constraints are incorporated into
an action by virtue of the localsymmetry of the system.

PACS Nos.:
11.10.Ef, 11.30.Ly, 11.90.+t

SECTION: Introduction
In the mid to late 1970’s, Penrose, Perjés, and Hughston independently studied the twistor
description of a massive spinning particle in four-dimensional Minkowski space.
In their studies,twistors
are introduced and an inhomogeneous extension of,
which is denoted by, is found as an internal symmetry group associated with massive particles.
(See Ref.Mason for recent topics concerning a twistor description of massive particles.)

In the early 2000’s,
Lagrange mechanics of a massive spinning particle formulated
using two twistors has been studied from both classical and quantum mechanical points of view.
In earlier formulations, however,
all the necessary constraints are incorporated into
actions of a massive particle by hand with the use of appropriate Lagrange multipliers.

About 8 years ago from now,
the present authors gave a gauged twistor formulation of a massive spinning particle
in four dimensions.
In this formulation, the necessary constraints
except mass-shell constraints are automatically
incorporated in an action by virtue of the gauge symmetry under
a localtransformation.
In contrast, the mass-shell constraints given here
are still incorporated into the action by hand.

The purpose of this paper is to show that the mass-shell constraints can also be
incorporated in the action automatically by extending
the localtransformation to its inhomogeneous extension denoted by.
In this way, it turns out that all the necessary constraints are incorporated in
the action on the basis of the localsymmetry of the system.

This paper is organized as follows.
In Sec. 2, we review the gauged twistor model of a massive spinning particle
presented in Ref.DegOka.
In Sec. 3, we show that the mass-shell constraints are certainly derived
by inhomogeneous extensions of the transformation rules of twistor and some
associated variables.
Section 4 is devoted to conclusions.
In the Appendix, we derive geometric formulas for the coset space.

SECTION: Gauged twistor model of a massive spinning particle in four dimensions
(A review)
Penrose, Perjés, and Hughston introduced two or more
independent twistors to describe a massive particle in four-dimensional Minkowski space,.
About 7 years ago from now, it was proven that
the-twistor expression of four-momentum vector of a massive particle
reduces to the two-twistor expression of it by a unitary transformation.
Taking into account this fact, we now introduce two independent twistorsdistinguished by the indexand their dual twistors.
Here,anddenote the complex conjugates
ofand, respectively:,.
It is assumed thatandare not proportional to each other, i.e.,(), and hence.
The spinorsandare related bywithbeing coordinates of a point in complexified Minkowski space,.
In addition to the twistors and their dual twistors, we introduce
an inhomogeneous coordinateof a point on the coset space.
Thesymmetry considered here is linearly realized for the pair of twistors.
(For the nonlinear realization of, see the appendix.)

Now, we recall the action for a massive spinning particle found in
Ref.DegOka:

with

Here,,, andare understood to be
complex scalar fields on the one-dimensional parameter spaceof a particle’s worldline,is a real scalar field on,is a complex scalar-density field of weight 1 on,is a positive real scalar-density field of weight 1 on,
andandare real scalar-density fields of weight 1 on.
The fieldis regarded as a one-dimensionalgauge field,
while the fieldsare regarded as one-dimensionalgauge fields.
Theare the matrix elements of the matrixdefined using the Pauli matrices.
The fieldplays the role of an einbein field.
The specific forms of,,,
andare given
in Eqs. (), (), (), and (), respectively.
The three pairs ofanddistinguished byconstitute theKilling vectors on.
In addition,is a constant mass parameter,andare real constants,
andis a positive real constant.
A dot over a field denotes its derivative with respect to.

The action () remains invariant under the reparametrization.
In addition, this action remains invariant under the localtransformation

with a real transformation parametersatisfying.
Furthermore, the action () remains invariant under the localtransformation

with a transformation matrixsatisfying.

Now, we take the unitary gauge specified by,
wheredenote coset representatives of the coset space.
The conditionleads to(see the appendix).
Then, as shown in the appendix,,,,
and Eq. () hold, and hence we haveandfor. (Here, note thatcan be expanded aswith.)
Hence, in the unitary gauge, the action () becomes

where().
In Ref.DegOka, this action was referred to as.
In the unitary gauge, the localinvariance ofis spoiled,
whileremains invariant under another localtransformation

with the matrix.
Here,is a real transformation parameter satisfying.
The localinvariance ofis thus converted
to the invariance under the localtransformation ()
by means of the gauge fixing such that.
To avoid confusion, we hereafter refer to the transformation () as thetransformation
and refer to the transformation () as thetransformation.
Their corresponding gauge groups are simply denoted asand.

For our purpose, it is convenient to rewrite the action () as

Variation of the action () with respect to,, andyields
the constraints

respectively,
where

Additionally, variation of the action () with respect toyields.
Combining this and Eq. (), we obtain

In earlier formulations,
constraints similar to Eqs. (), (), and () have been
incorporated into an action by hand with the help of appropriate Lagrange multipliers.
In contrast, in our formulation, the constraints ()–() are
automatically incorporated in the actionon the basis of the gauge principle.
In fact, Eq. () is based on theinvariance ofand
Eqs. () and () are based on theinvariance of.
For the constraint (), it is obtained in connection with the invariance ofunder the reparametrizationand thetransformation.

Variation ofwith respect toandyields the mass-shell constraints

Equation () is the complex conjugate of Eq. ().
In our previous paper,
unlike the constraints ()–(),
the constraints () and () have not been considered to be that which
are derived in relation to some gauge invariance of.
In earlier papers,
the constraints () and (),
or constraints similar to them,
have been introduced by hand without taking into account gauge symmetries.

SECTION: Inhomogeneous transformations
For convenience, we combine the transformations () and () into
the following localtransformation:

whereis defined by,
being an element ofand satisfying. In addition,is a one-dimensionalgauge field defined by, withbeing the 2 by 2 unit matrix.
The transformation rule () can be verified by using the transformation rules () and ().
As pointed out by Perjés and Hughston independently,
the linear transformations
that preserve both the momentum vectorand the angular momentum spinorform a Lie group by themselves.
This group is a group extension ofdefined so as to include inhomogeneous transformations,
and it is denoted by.

For a massive particle,
the-twistor expression ofgiven above reduces
to the two-twistor expressionby a unitary transformation, as was proved in Ref.OkaDeg.
Therefore it is sufficient to consider only the two-twistor system in which thesymmetry is realized.
Inhomogeneous extensions of Eqs. () and () are, respectively, found to be

whereis a complex transformation parameter
for the local inhomogeneous transformation,
satisfying.
(In the two-twistor system, a skew-symmetric parametercan be
written as.)
In addition,anddenote the so-called infinity twistors defined by

If, Eqs. () and () become Eqs. () and (), respectively.

Using Eqs. () and (), we can derive the transformation behaviors
ofandunder the localtransformation as follows:

Additionally, using Eqs () and () together with the formulas

we can show that

Thus we see that the integrand in the first line of Eq. ()
is not invariant under the inhomogeneous transformation,
even when it is the global transformation specified by.

Now, we note that the second and third lines in the right-hand side of Eq. (),
which we refer to as extra terms,
are proportional to the quantityor.
Since the same quantities are included in the actionin the form of,
it is possible to cancel out the extra terms by carrying out an appropriate
modification of the transformation rules () and ().
In fact, we can completely cancel out the extra terms by modifying
Eqs. () and () to be

respectively.
Here,andare regarded as gauge fields for the inhomogeneous transformation,
because the transformation ofandgiven in Eq. () provides the terms
that contribute to canceling out the extra terms in Eq. ().

At the same time, we modify the transformation rule ()
in such a way that the mass termwithincluded inremains invariant under the simultaneous transformation that is defined by
Eq. () and a modified version of Eq. ().
The square of the both sides of the invariant conditionleads to.
This can be solved to yield

Here,holds, becauseis satisfied. Equation () is precisely a modified version of Eq. ().
When, Eqs. (), (), and () reduce to
Eqs. (), (), and (), respectively.

The actionturns out to be invariant
under the localtransformation

rather than under the localtransformation in Eq. ().
In this way, the localsymmetry of the present twistor model
can be extended to the localsymmetry.

SECTION: Conclusions
As we have seen,
it is necessary forto includeas an additive term
in order thatcan remain invariant under the localtransformation
as a result of canceling out the extra terms in Eq. ().
Here, it is essential thatandtransform inhomogeneously as the gauge fields
corresponding to the parametersand, respectively, as in Eq. ().

The actionalso includes the mass term,
which itself remains invariant under the localtransformation.
The sum of these two terms reads

which is precisely the mass-shell term of.
The localinvariance ofholds with the aid of
the one-dimensional gauge fields,,, and.

In our formulation,has been found on the basis of the localsymmetry of the system.
Therefore the mass-shell constraints () and () are considered to be
outcomes originated in the symmetry under the inhomogeneous transformation.
We can say that all the constraints, including the mass-shell constraints,
are automatically derived from the localsymmetry in a self-contained way.

Canonical quantization of the twistor model governed bywas actually carried out
in Ref.DegOka. In the quantization procedure, the first-class constraints (), () and ()
are treated as conditions imposed on the physical state vector,
after replacing functions in the constraints by the corresponding operators.
Another canonical quantization is performed after fixing gauge at the classical level.
We expect that the convenient gauge-fixing for quantization can be carried out by using
the localsymmetry.

SECTION: 
In this paper and Ref.DegOka,
the coset spaceis introduced to nonlinearly realize
thesymmetry that is linearly realized for the pair of twistors.
In the appendix, we briefly mentionand some formulas used
in the gauged twistor formulation of a massive particle.

Letbe an inhomogeneous coordinate of a point onand letbe representative elements chosen from
each left coset oflabeled by.
The left action ofoncauses a nonlinear transformationin accordance with

Here,is the third component of the Pauli matrices,
andis a real parameter for thetransformation generated by.

From, we defineandby

Here,are defined from the Pauli matricesandas.
Choosingto be an appropriate form

with

we obtain

The so-called zweibeinsandlead to a proper metric tensor on:

The-component of the metric tensor
is precisely the Fubini-Study metric tensor on.

Now, suppose thatis infinitely near the identity so thatis valid with infinitesimal parameters.
Accordingly,,, andcan take the following form:,, and.
Substituting these into Eq. (),
we obtain

after removing.
It turns out that, or more precisely,
are the so-calledKilling vectors onand theare associated compensators.
Multiplying Eq.() byfrom the left and using Eq. () yield

whereare defined by

The matrixis the adjoint representation of.
From Eq. (), we have

In the unitary gauge specified by,
it follows that.
When, we see from Eq. () that, and hence we see from () that.
By substitutinginto Eqs. () and (), they reduce to

Accordingly, Eq. () becomes

Using Eqs. () and () and,
we can show that

Similarly, using Eq. (), we can show that

SECTION: References