SECTION: Angular Momentum Drain: Despinning Embedded Planetesimals

Young and forming planetesimals experience impacts from particles present in a protostellar disk. Using crater scaling laws, we integrate ejecta distributions for oblique impacts. For impacts at 10 to 65 m/s, expected for impacts associated with a disk wind, we estimate the erosion rate and torque exerted on the planetesimal. We find that the mechanism for angular momentum drain proposed by Dobrovolskis and Burns (1984) for asteroids could operate in the low velocity regime of a disk wind.
Though spin-down associated with impacts can facilitate planetesimal collapse, we find that the process is inefficient. We find that angular momentum drain via impacts operates in the gravitational focusing regime, though even less efficiently than for lower mass planetesimals. The angular momentum transfer is most effective when the wind speed is low, the projectile density is high compared to the bulk planetesimal density, and the planetesimal is composed of low-strength material.
Due to its inefficiency, we find that angular momentum drain due to impacts within a pebble cloud does not by itself facilitate collapse of single planetesimals.

SECTION: 1Introduction

The spin rates of most asteroids have been altered by impacts(Farinella et al.,1992; Mao and McKinnon,2020).
Because high velocity ejecta preferentially escapes along the direction of rotation, impacts cumulatively cause asteroids and other minor bodies to spin down(Dobrovolskis and Burns,1984; Cellino et al.,1990; Takeda and Ohtsuki,2009; Ševeček et al.,2019).
Additional mechanisms for minor body spin evolution include sublimation and outgassing(Mueller and Ferrin,1996; Mottola et al.,2020), the YORP effect(Bottke et al.,2006)and tidal encounters(Scheeres et al.,2004).
In this study we focus on the mechanism for angular momentum drain by impacts proposed byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984), but apply it in the context of recently formed planetesimals during the epoch when they are embedded in a circumstellar disk.

Planetesimals are thought to form in particle-rich clumps that coalesce within a protoplanetary disk during an era of streaming instability(Johansen et al.,2007; Li et al.,2019; Carrera et al.,2021)or within turbulent vortices(Cuzzi et al.,2008).
For variations or alternatives to these scenarios, see the review bySimon et al. (2022).
Planetesimal collapse within a cloud of pebbles is expected to be inefficient, with only a fraction (between 50% to 100%) of a pebble cloud mass incorporated into bound objects(Robinson et al.,2020; Nesvorný et al.,2021; Polak and Klahr,2023).
During the final states of planetesimal collapse, the angular momentum
of the pebble cloud can generate a rapidly spinning disk or a bound binary(Nesvorný et al.,2019; Robinson et al.,2020; Nesvorný et al.,2021; Polak and Klahr,2023).
A newly formed planetesimal can experience accretion, erosion, and transport of particles across its surface while embedded in the protoplanetary disk(Rozner et al.,2020; Demirci et al.,2020; Quillen et al.,2024).

For a clump of massto be self-gravitating, its self-gravity should exceed the tidal force from the host star.
A gas or particle cloud would collapse if its mean densitywhere the modified Hill density is

(Paczyński1971, but also following equation 2 byPolak and Klahr2023). Hereis the mass of the star andis the orbital semi-major axis about the star.
At an orbital semi-major axis ofAU with, the modified Hill density is. This is approximatelytimes smaller than the density of Kuiper Belt Objects, ranging fromto(Brown,2012; Bierson and Nimmo,2019; Keane et al.,2022).

If a self-gravitating pebble cloud has some spin angular momentum, during collapse it would spin up (e.g.,Nesvorný et al.2021).
If the angular momentum of the cloud exceeds that of a critically rotating Jacobi ellipsoid of density about 1000 kg m-3, then angular momentum must be shed for the object to collapse into a single bound object.

In the context of the formation of Transneptunian binaries, mechanisms for removing angular momentum include the ejection of a third body(Noll et al.,2008), gravitational interactions with a distribution of small bodies residing in the disk(Goldreich et al.,2002; Funato et al.,2004)or collisions(Weidenschilling,2002). The simulations byNesvorný et al. (2021)illustrate that the particles within the pebble cloud itself can serve as a reservoir for angular momentum, and that collisions between particles within the cloud can facilitate dissipation and angular momentum transfer.
Binaries, contact binaries, and disk shaped objects may be a consequence of the angular momentum of a pebble cloud prior to its collapse(Nesvorný et al.,2021; Polak and Klahr,2023).

We focus on the connection between impacts from particles in a pebble cloud and the spin angular momentum of a collapsing body.
As impacts can spin down an asteroid(Dobrovolskis and Burns,1984), impacts could aid in collapse of a pebble cloud, and the host pebble cloud would serve as a reservoir or sink for angular momentum. While planetesimals are embedded in a disk, low velocity impacts could be frequent(Quillen et al.,2024).
While impacts in the asteroid belt tend to be hypervelocity at a few km/s(Bottke et al.,1994)and can generate a spray of ejected particles(Lauretta et al.,2019), impact velocities on a planetesimal within a pebble cloud would be substantially lower, between a few to tens of m/s(Johansen et al.,2007; McKinnon et al.,2020; Quillen et al.,2024).

With a high velocity impact on a small body, most ejecta escapes. But at lower impact velocities, the fraction of ejecta that escapes is more sensitive to body rotation, impact location, impact and ejecta angles, and the planetesimal’s escape velocity(Hirata et al.,2021; Hyodo and Genda,2021; Quillen et al.,2024). Using an ejecta velocity distribution, we can determine the mass of ejecta that is above the escape velocity and so escapes the planetesimal.
The work byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)dealt with high-velocity, erosional impacts that reduce the spin-rate of the asteroid.
We extend this work to a low velocity regime to see how impacts affect the mass loss and angular momentum of a planetesimal that is embedded in a protostellar disk.

The integrations byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)neglected the sensitivity of ejecta mass to azimuthal angle for oblique impacts, however recent studies(Raducan et al.,2022; Luo et al.,2022; Quillen and Doran,2024)have begun to characterize the azimuthal dependence of oblique impact ejecta distributions. In this work,
we use recent estimates for the azimuthal sensitivity of ejecta to impact angle to determine which ejecta escape.Dobrovolskis and Burns (1984)focused on the role of impacts on asteroids. In this setting the projectiles originate from different directions. The changes in angular momentum caused by impacts were modeled with a random walk(Dobrovolskis and Burns,1984). In contrast, the spin axis of a planetesimal that is embedded within a circumstellar disk could be related to the direction of a headwind containing particle projectiles(Nesvorný et al.,2021; Quillen et al.,2024). Consequently in this study we consider impacts from a uniform direction that is perpendicular to the planetesimal spin axis.

To form planetesimals within a protostellar disk, dust particles and ices coagulate to form low density and low-strength aggregates, which are often called pebbles(Lorek et al.,2018; O’Rourke et al.,2020). Millimeter sized aggregates, that later form into planetesimals, initially would be porous, with volume filling factor well below a percentLorek et al. (2018).
An aggregate growing via cohesive or sticky collisions reaches a size known as the bouncing barrier, where collisions bounce rather than stick, compressing the aggregate to a volume filling factor of 1 - 10%(Lorek et al.,2018). Icy and dusty aggregates are likely porous or fluffy when the disk undergoes streaming instability(Lorek et al.,2018). Because of the large range of possible densities for pebbles in a primordial disk, in this study we also vary the ratio of projectile to planetesimal density.

SECTION: 1.1Outline

In Section2we discuss reference frames and planetesimal collisions with particles that originate in a headwind. We use the point-source approximation ejecta scaling model developed for normal impacts(Housen and Holsapple,2011)that has been extended to be sensitive to impact angle as well as ejecta azimuthal angle(Raducan et al.,2022; Quillen and Doran,2024). We describe how we estimate the angular momentum transfer and fraction of ejecta that escape from single impacts.

In Section3we apply the framework for single impacts to a distribution of collisions across the planetesimal surface. These collisions are oriented on a Cartesian grid overlaid onto the cross-sectional area of the planetesimal in the inertial reference frame. We use the Transneptunian object Arrokoth as a fiducial setting for our integrations and highlight the importance of gravitational focusing.

In Section4, we vary planetesimal and projectile parameters to explore the sensitivity of the angular momentum transfer efficiency and mass loss ratio to physical properties such as planetesimal and projectile density, planetesimal strength, planetesimal spin rate, and projectile velocity, and spatial projectile velocity gradient.

SECTION: 2Impacts on an Embedded Planetesimal

We consider a planetesimal that is bombarded by particles that reside in a circumstellar disk.
We assume that, due to a difference between the velocity of the planetesimal and that of gas and small particles in the disk, impacts originate from a preferred direction, as shown in Figure1.
A planetesimal embedded in the disk feels a wind known as a ‘headwind’ that arises because the gas in the disk feels pressure, giving the gas a mean tangential circular velocity below that of a circular Keplerian orbit(Whipple,1972).
We refer to the particle flow as particles within a headwind, but impacts from particles could also occur within a vortex clump(Cuzzi et al.,2008)or a pebble cloud clump that has formed during streaming instability(Johansen et al.,2007).

SECTION: 2.1Planetesimal Properties

FollowingDobrovolskis and Burns (1984),
we take the planetesimal to be spherical with uniform escape velocity,

whereis the planetesimal mass,is the planetesimal radius, andis the gravitational constant.
We assume solid body rotation and an isotropic and homogeneous body.

Because planetesimals can have a high spin rate(Johansen and Lacerda,2010; Robinson et al.,2020; Nesvorný et al.,2021),
we describe body spin in terms of its maximum rotation rate where a particle on the equator would leave the surface due to centrifugal acceleration. We put spin in units of the centrifugal break-up value for a sphere,

whereis the planetesimal’s bulk density.

The rotation axis of the planetesimal is assumed to be perpendicular to the incident
wind direction, as shown in Figure1.
This assumption is motivated by simulations of pebble accretion which suggest that planetesimals form with rotation axis prograde with respect to the disk in which they are embedded(Johansen and Lacerda,2010).
Figure1illustrates a Cartesian inertial coordinate system, with wind particles originating from thedirection and the planetesimal spin axis pointing toward thedirection.

SECTION: 2.2Inertial and Rotation Frames

The impact velocity for a collision with a headwind particle is 10 - 65 m/s (e.g.,Quillen et al.2024) and is low compared to most impacts that currently take place in the inner solar system, which are at velocities of a few km/s(Bottke et al.,1994). A 10 km planetesimal of bulk densitykg m-3spinning near breakup has rotational velocity of about 5 m/s.
The ratio of rotational velocity to impact velocity and the ratio of rotational velocity to the velocity of ejecta are higher in our setting than in the context of km/s impacts on asteroids (studied byDobrovolskis and Burns1984).
As a consequence we do not neglect the rotational velocity when computing impact velocities in the frame rotating with the planetesimal surface.
Figure2illustrates how the impact velocity, as seen in a frame rotating with the surface, depends upon the impact location and the direction of rotation.

We denote the location of an impact on the planetesimal surface with the vector, originating from the planetesimal’s center of mass. The velocity of the surface atis

whereis the planetesimal spin vector, which we take to be aligned with. On a spherical planetesimal

SECTION: 2.3The Impact Velocity and Impact Angle in the Rotating Frame

The ejecta velocity distribution depends on both impact velocity and direction in the frame rotating with the surface at the point of impact. In the rotating frame moving with the surface, the projectile velocity is

whereis the projectile velocity in the inertial frame, as shown in Figure1. The rotation velocityis calculated using Equation4for a given position vector.

We define a unit vectoras vector normal to the surface and pointing away from the surface at the site of impact. We define a downrange vectoras a unit vector tangential to the surface pointing downrange (or away) from the direction from which the projectile originated.
The unit normal and downrange vectors are

whereis the projectile velocity vector
in the frame rotating with the surface. The unit vectoris computed by projecting the incoming projectile velocity into the plane tangent to the surface at the point of impact.
It is convenient to have a set of 3 orthogonal unit vectors at the site of impact. A third unit vector,, called the binormal vector, is perpendicular toand, and
is

The impact angle,is defined as the angle between the projectile velocity (in the rotating frame) and the plane tangent to the surface

The minus sign arises because we have defined the normal directionpointing outward from the surface. The impact angle is low for grazing impacts and equal tofor a normal impact. Figure3illustrates
the different directions and angles for an impact in the rotating frame.

SECTION: 2.4Crater Scaling and Ejecta Distributions

The momentum transfer parameter and the angular momentum imparted to a planetesimal by an impact depends upon the integrated properties of the ejecta (e.g.,Dobrovolskis and Burns1984; Takeda and Ohtsuki2009; Raducan et al.2022). We first discuss the velocity and mass distributions of ejecta from normal impacts and then consider more general ejecta distributions from oblique impacts.

When computing the properties of ejecta, we assume that planetesimal mass exceeds projectile mass,, and planetesimal mass also exceeds total ejecta mass;. We neglect the possibility of projectile ricochet (e.g.,Wright et al.2020) and projectile spin (e.g.,Carvalho et al.2023a,b,2024).

Normal impacts are often described in terms of three dimensionless parameters(Housen and Holsapple,2011);

whereis the surface gravitational acceleration on the planetesimal surface, the projectile radius is, and the density of planetesimal and projectile areand, respectively.
Impacts from headwind particles onto a planetesimal are likely to be in the strength regime (Quillen et al.2024followingScheeres et al.2010) where crater and ejecta properties only depend uponand.

We adopt the ejecta scaling laws for normal impacts byHousen and Holsapple (2011), which were derived assuming a point source approximation. The ejection velocity is a function of distancefrom the impact site where the ejecta crosses the surface level plane (as it was prior to impact), as illustrated in Figure3.
The ejecta velocity scaling law is

The exponentsand coefficientsdepend
upon substrate material properties.
We have added ansubscript, denoting normal impact, to parameters that we vary below when discussing oblique impacts.

Housen and Holsapple (2011)find that the
coefficients,, and.
Equation13holds for, whereis the crater radius for a normal impact. The crater radius
is the radius at which the crater profile crosses the surface level plane, as shown in Figure3.
In the strength regime, the crater radius for a normal impact is

with coefficientthat also depends upon substrate material properties(Housen and Holsapple,2011).

The ejecta mass integrated betweenfrom the site of impact is

and with coefficient(Housen and Holsapple,2011).

Ejecta velocity, ejecta angle, and mass distributions for oblique impacts are sensitive to both impact angle,, and azimuthal angle within the crater,(Anderson et al.,2003; Raducan et al.,2022; Quillen and Doran,2024). We take azimuthal angleto be the angle in the surface plane (as seen from above the crater in the plane spanned by unit vectorsand), with directiondownrange, as adopted byAnderson et al. (2003); Raducan et al. (2022).

FollowingRaducan et al. (2022); Quillen and Doran (2024)we modify equations13,14, and15to be sensitive to both impact angle and azimuthal angle, giving
functions for crater radius, exponent, and coefficients(dropping thesubscript)
that are consistent with normal impact scaling

We adopt the functions estimated byRaducan et al. (2022)from measurements of ejecta from 3D iSALE oblique impact simulations;

In equation22the impact angleis in radians.

The functions given byRaducan et al. (2022)in their equations 6–9 (and here with our equations20–23) are not consistent with their Figure 12 but appear consistent with the distributions shown in their other figures. The weak dependence of the functionon anglesandis supported by laboratory measurements of the azimuthal ejecta mass distribution from 104 m/s oblique impacts into sand(Quillen and Doran,2024).

With the scaling functions for oblique impacts (Equations20-22), we modify Equation13, giving an oblique impact ejecta velocity function,

whereandare calculated from Equations20–22. Equation15for the mass distribution, is similarly modified to depend on azimuthal and impact angles

withfrom equation23.

SECTION: 2.5Ejecta Velocity Components

Ejecta distributions are calculated in the frame rotating with the surface; however, to determine which ejecta escape the planetesimal, we compare the ejecta velocities in the inertial frame to the escape velocity.
Because the maximum ejecta velocity is usually less than the projectile velocity, the ratio of ejecta velocity to rotational velocity is larger than the ratio of projectile velocity to rotational velocity. This means when we transfer back into the inertial frame, planetesimal rotation causes a more significant change in the ejecta velocity, than there was when we transferred into the rotating frame. This is illustrated in Figures2-4.
In other words, we could have neglected the rotational velocity when estimating the ejecta distribution, but should not neglect the rotational velocity when determining which ejecta escapes.

In the surface rotational frame, and
in terms of the surface normal, downrange and binormal vector directions,
the ejecta velocity is

with components

Hereis the downrange component,is the normal component,is the binormal component, andis the ejecta angle.
Experiments and simulations find that
the ejecta anglevaries by less than 10 degrees as a function of impact angle, launch position and azimuthal angle(Anderson et al.,2003; Raducan et al.,2022). Hence we assume thatis constant.

For each impact we compute
ejecta distributions
in the frame rotating with the surface using equations24for the velocity and25for the mass distribution. To determine which ejecta escape the planetesimal, we transfer the ejecta velocity back into the inertial frame by reversing equation5;

SECTION: 2.6The Mass and Momentum of Escaping Ejecta

FollowingHolsapple and Housen (2012), we assume that
a parcel of ejecta with velocity greater than the escape velocity,, escapes from the system. We define a function that describes whether a parcel of ejecta escapes,

where the escape velocity is from Equation2.

To find the ejecta mass for a specific launch locationfrom the site of impact, we differentiate Equation15(with respect to) giving

Integrating this over possible launch positionwithin the crater radius and for different azimuthal angles, we compute the total escaping ejecta mass from a single impact;

Since we neglect ricochet, we assume the mass of the projectile is either accreted onto the planetesimal or incorporated into ejecta. Thusindicates accretion, whileindicates erosion.

For a distribution of impacts, we define a mass ratio

which is the average fraction of mass ejected per unit projectile mass.

We denote the momentum in escaping ejecta in the rotating frame as.
We calculate the downrange component of the escaping ejecta

Themomentum component of the escaping ejecta can be neglected because the adopted ejecta distribution is symmetric about the-plane.
We don’t compute the normal momentum component because it does not contribute to the torque on the planetesimal.

SECTION: 2.7The Angular Momentum Transfer Efficiency

The change in planetesimal angular momentum due to the impact at locationwould be

repeating equation67.
SeeAfor why this depends upon the momentum of escaping ejecta computed in the rotating frame and why we can neglect the ejecta trajectory after impact.

When averaging over a distribution of impacts that lack angular momentum with respect to the planetesimal, the projectile momentum term in equation34can be neglected as it averages to zero. We only need to calculate the rightmost term that
depends on the momentum of escaping ejecta as seen in the rotating frame.
Because the planetesimal is orbiting the star, it is likely to feel a headwind coming from different directions in the orbital plane (see Figure1). We assume thatcomponents that are not aligned with the planetesimal’s spin axis average to zero.
This implies that the average change in angular momentum per impact for a distribution of projectiles is

whereis the unit vector along the spin axis.
We only need to use the downrange component of escaping ejecta (equation33) to calculate the angular momentum parallel to the spin axis, as that is transferred to the planetesimal via the escaping ejecta.
The change in angular momentum of the planetesimal
per unit projectile mass is equal to.

We define a dimensionless angular momentum transfer efficiency

whereis the planetesimal’s spin angular momentum and that of a homogeneous spinning sphere.

The angular momentum transfer efficiency is the fractional change in angular momentum caused by a distribution of projectiles per unit projectile mass in units of planetesimal mass. The amount of projectile mass required to remove a significant fraction of the planetesimal’s spin angular momentum would be approximately.

SECTION: 2.8Gravitational Focusing

For higher mass planetesimals, those with escape velocity above the projectile velocity, the gravitational field of the planetesimal causes gravitational focusing. In this case the velocity and angle of impact is sensitive to the orbit of the projectile when approaching the planetesimal.
We compute the velocity and location of the impact using a hyperbolic orbit, neglecting gas drag. To collide with a spherical object of massand radius, a projectile must have impact parameterlower than

We have neglected the size of the projectile, assuming that it is small compared to the planetesimal.
Hereis the headwind velocity distant from the planetesimal. We assume that the projectile has the same velocity.
With an impact parameter of, the projectile would graze the planetesimal.

We define a new Cartesian coordinate system with coordinatesto describe the hyperbolic orbit of the projectile.
The orbit of the projectile lies in theplane. The angleis the angle between the projectile orbital plane and the xy plane of the circumstellar disk.
We assume that the projectile arrives from thedirection.
We determine the components of the impact location on the planetesimal surface

whereis the difference between the maximum true anomaly and the true anomaly at impact.
SeeB, and specifically equation73, for an expression for.

We calculate the impact velocity in the inertial frame using energy conservation,

Only when we neglect gravitational focusing entirely is the velocity at impact equal to that of the headwind,.
Even on low mass planetesimals, with, the gravitational field would affect the impact velocity. The collision angle (the angle between the surface normal and the orbital trajectory at the impact point) is

with the convention that a grazing impact has. SeeBEquation71for an equation for the true anomaly of the impact,.
The impact velocity vector in the inertial reference frame is then

We calculate the projectile velocity using Equation41for all impacts, regardless of the planetesimal mass.

To go into thecoordinate system relevant for computing the ejecta distributions, shown in Figure1,
(taking into account the orbit orientation) we rotate the calculated location of impact and the velocity of impact around the x-axis with rotation matrix

The resulting impact velocity is used to compute the impact angle in the rotating frame, with Equation9.

SECTION: 2.9Caveats

While computing the integrated erosion rate and the angular momentum transfer efficiency in this section, we have neglected some degrees of freedom. We mention these points here as possible directions of future study.

We have neglected gravitational focusing of the escaping ejecta particles. Neglecting gravitational ”defocusing” does not influence our estimate of the angular momentum transfer efficiency, but would influence computation of the linear momentum transfer efficiency.

For simplicity, we have neglected the shape of the planetesimal by assuming that it is spherical. If we allow for non-spherical planetesimals, the gravity vector at a surface location is not necessarily perpendicular to the surface, so the surface can have a slope with respect to the direction of self-gravity. Studies measuring crater volume, diameter, and axis ratio of oblique impacts into inclined granular media find that ejecta distributions also depend on surface slope(Takizawa and Katsuragi,2020; Omura et al.,2021). In future, models could be extended to take into account impact angle, surface slope and the direction and values of ejecta velocity vectors that allow ejecta to escape. Such models could find an analogies to the Yarkosky effect, causing orbital drift, but mediated by momentum exchange with a distribution of projectiles.

We neglected heterogeneity of the planetesimal surface. Its surface could be rough and contain particles of different sizes, densities, compositions, and shapes. These variations are not accounted for in the ejecta distribution models that are used throughout this paper but might influence the fraction and momentum content of escaping ejecta.

Crater ejecta would be effected by the headwind flowing around the surface of the planetesimal, as shown byQuillen et al. (2024). Accurate models of rarefied gas flow around a planetesimal would help determine the quantity of ejecta that escapes, as small ejecta particles are swept up by a disk wind near the planetesimal surface. A wind would accelerate small particles in low velocity ejecta to beyond the escape velocity. However, the fraction of material swept up would be approximately the same equal on leading and trailing sides of the planetesimal, so we suspect that the total contribution to the angular momentum loss would be low.

In this study we have neglected projectile spin. However, studies of impacts from spinning projectiles(Carvalho et al.,2023a,b,2024)find that crater profiles are sensitive to projectile spin.
To accurately take into account the projectile spin, we would need an accurate description of the spin angular momentum distribution of the particles within the source of projectiles. Additionally, crater scaling coefficients for the ejecta could become dependent upon the projectile spin.

SECTION: 3Ejecta Distributions for Single Impacts

In Section2we explained how we estimate the total ejecta mass that escapes and the angular momentum transferred to the planetesimal from a distribution of impacts. In this section we examine the ejecta distributions from a single impact.
Additionally, we will explore the role of gravitational focusing.

Unless otherwise stated, we assume a set of fiducial values for the planetesimal and projectile properties, which are listed in Table1.
Particle ejecta angles (measured from the surface normal) tend to lie between 30∘- 60∘with a narrow variation (10∘- 20∘)(Stoeffler et al.,1975; Anderson et al.,2003,2004; Tsujido et al.,2015; Wünnemann et al.,2016; Luther et al.,2018; Raducan et al.,2022; Suo et al.,2024). We adopt a constant 45∘ejecta angle.

For each impact, we generate a 2 dimensional polar grid of ejecta launch positions (values) and azimuthal angles (values). Hereis the radial position within the crater centered at the site of impact impact (see Figure3), in units of the projectile radius,. At each point on this grid we compute an ejecta velocity velocity in the rotating frame, an ejecta velocity vector in the inertial frame, and the ejecta mass.
We calculate the crater radiusfor a normal impact using Equation14.
Following the point-source approximation, we reject locations withorby setting the ejecta mass and velocity at those grid points to zero. For all remainingandpoints within our grid, we calculate the ejecta velocity and mass. The ejecta velocityin the rotating frame within an oblique impact crater is given by Equation24, and crater radiusin equation22.

Using Equations26and27, we calculate the ejecta velocity components in the rotating frame at each point on our grid. We also compute the inertial frame ejecta velocity(via Equations26). The ejecta velocity is compared to the escape velocity. We assume that particles escape if.

Figure5shows an impact that, absent rotation, would be a normal impact at longitude (long) = 0∘, latitude (lat) = 0∘, where we define long = 0∘to be the furthest point of the planetesimal on the headwind-facing hemisphere. The influence of rotation can be seen by the fact that the ejecta curtain is not azimuthally symmetric, but rather it is oblong because it is an oblique impact, with impact angle. The figure show a polar plot with angle equal to the azimuthal angleand distance between the origin to the ejecta launch distancefrom the impact site in units of projectile radius,. The color shows the ejecta velocity (in the rotating frame) which decreases as a function of ejecta launch distance.

Because the impact in Figure5is a nearly normal impact, the projectile velocity is nearly but not exactly azimuthally symmetric, as shown in Figure5a. In Figure5b, the color also shows ejecta velocity in the rotating frame, but we only show points with ejecta velocity in the inertial frame that lie above the escape velocity. The boundary is not azimuthally symmetric. We find that the rotation is important in determining which ejecta escapes, even at low rotation velocities.

SECTION: 3.1Importance of Gravitational Focusing

In this section we compare ejecta distributions from a single impact assuming no gravitational deflection with one that is deflected on a hyperbolic orbit. The projectile has densitykg m-3, has impact parameterand(describing the orbital tilt). The distant headwind velocity is equal to the fiducial value ofm s-1. The planetesimal radius in this example iskm and barely large enough that the orbital deflection could be important. Usingkg m-3and Equation2, we find that the escape velocity from the planetesimalm s-1.

Figure6compares the two ejecta distributions. Figure6a and b show the ejecta mass distributions, with and without gravitational focusing, as a function of ejection site in polar coordinates. Consequently, the locations and velocities of the two impacts differ.
In Figure6c, we subtract the ejecta mass distributions from each impact and show the mass residuals in units of. As a percentage, the residual shows a maximum change of4% in the ejecta mass distribution as a result of gravitational focusing. In Figure6d, the velocity distributions are subtracted and the residual is plotted in units of escape velocity,. The residuals for ejecta velocity are large, particularly for the highest velocity material that is likely to escape the planetesimal, with the greatest residual equating to a12% change.

The inclusion of gravitational focusing results in a change to all of the impact parameters calculated. The impact velocity for the non-deflected case is equal to the distant headwind velocity,(30 m s-1), whereas in the deflected case30.86 m s-1.
The impact locations differ slightly between the non-deflected and deflected impacts, (lat = 0∘, long) and (lat, long), respectively. Similarly, the two impacts have different impact angles for the non-deflected and deflected impacts, (vs.). The differences in impact angle (a result of different impact locations) and projectile velocity caused by gravitational focusing results in the changes in the ejecta distributions seen in Figure6.

For a planetesimal with radius ofkm we see the influences of gravitational focusing altering the ejecta distributions due to changes in the impact parameters. For a planetesimal with this radius (20 km), the maximum impact parameter (Equation37) ism. Thus, for a projectile with a0.729 (Due to assuming b = 0.75as was done in Figure6), and a planetesimal with0.97, the effects of gravitational focusing are no longer negligible.
Mild deflection of a projectile trajectory due to a low-mass planetesimal results in a noticeable change to the impact angle, velocity, and location, resulting in changes of a few percent to the ejecta distribution for the projectile.

SECTION: 3.2Caveat: Ejecta Models

In our integrations we use an ejecta angle of 45∘; however, a distribution of angles sensitive to azimuthal angle, impact angle, and launch position would allow for more physically accurate integrations. In future, functions for ejecta scaling parameters could be fit to simulated ejecta angle distributions at a range of impact velocities (Raducan et al.2022fit 4 functions but not the ejecta angle and only simulated high velocity impacts) or to experimental data (Anderson et al.2003measured this angle experimentally in oblique impacts but did not fit functions to them and also only considered high velocity impacts). WhileQuillen and Doran (2024)studied oblique impacts at intermediate impact velocity, they only studied the sensitivity of the integrated ejecta mass and crater radius to impact and azimuthal angle. There is a need for more experimental characterization of oblique impacts.

Cohesion is incorporated into a strength parameter describing the asteroid surface. However, this description may not capture granular dynamics, particularly if projectiles are similar in size to particles on the planetesimal surface.

Porosity can affect crater shape and ejecta properties(Housen and Holsapple,2003), which we did not take into account.
Variation due to porosity increasingly affects large craters when looking at small bodies, resulting in a reduction in ejecta mass, while for small craters the ejecta blankets are unaltered. When the product of gravitational acceleration and crater diameter,(in cgs), for planetesimal porosity of 42% and 70%, the ejected crater mass begins to level out and eject 80-90% the mass of an equivalent non-porous crater (Housen and Holsapple2003).

SECTION: 4Torque from a Distribution of Impacts

In the previous section we integrated the ejecta mass and velocity distributions for a single impact. In this section we integrate a distribution of impacts to estimate the total mass ejected and the angular momentum transferred to the planetesimal by a population of impactors.

To choose impact locations on the planetesimal surface, we generate a uniform distribution of coordinate pairs,, and reject point pairs with an impact parameter, noting that. The orbit angle, and impact parameterdetermine the impact location, velocity and angle, as outlined inBand the maximum impact parameteris given in equation37.

To model impacts from particles moving in a headwind, we assume that far from the planetesimal the projectiles are all unidirectional with magnitude equal to the headwind velocity,. We take gravitational focusing into account for all planetesimal masses. Consequently we use hyperbolic orbits to calculate the projectile impact location, velocity, and impact angle on the planetesimal surface, as described in Section2.8.

The collisions are integrated to find the mass loss ratio (see Equation36) and angular momentum transfer efficiency (as defined in section2.7, Equations31,33-36). We perform similar integrations but with different planetesimal and projectile properties to understand how these properties affect the angular momentum transfer efficiency and mass loss ratio.

In Figure7, we plot the angular momentum transfer efficiency,and the mass loss ratioas a function of planetesimal radius. All quantities, when not specified, are taken to be those of the fiducial parameters listed in Table1. In Figure7a and7b, we vary the projectile densitygiving differentvalues. These panels show how the density ratio between the projectile and planetesimal affect the mass loss ratio and angular momentum change as a function of planetesimal radius. Figures7c -7h show how variations in strength, headwind velocity, and spinaffect the mass loss ratio and angular momentum transfer efficiency.

The panels in the left column of Figure7show that the angular momentum transfer efficiency is positive, confirming that the mechanism proposed byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)operates in a low velocity regime. However,
the angular transfer efficiency is low, at most0.07 in the most extreme case at. We find that the mechanism for spin down is inefficient. The panels in the right column show that, for our fiducial parameters, the total ejected mass remains in an accretionary regime, with the accretion being more efficient for larger radii planetesimals which have higher escape velocities. Thus the angular momentum drain mechanism proposed byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)also operates in an accretionary impact regime.

In Figure7, for planetesimal radiuskm, the angular momentum transfer efficiencyis nearly independent of planetesimal radius. Abovekm the angular momentum transfer efficiency tends to decrease, and this we attribute to due to gravitational focusing increasing the projectile impact velocity.

In Figure7c -7d we see low-strength planetesimal materials exhibit marginally increased angular momentum transfer efficiency at large planetesimal radii. At lower mass and radii, the effect flips, with low strength planetesimals exhibiting the least angular momentum spindown, with an intermediate strength values being most effective in this regime. At all points, especially at lower mass and radii, lower strength bodies exhibit increased mass loss because each crater sheds more material from the planetesimal when compared to one on a higher strength planetesimal.

In Figure7e-7f we show how the headwind velocity affects the mass loss ratio and angular momentum transfer efficiency. High wind velocities result in an increase in mass loss ratio,, and a decrease in angular momentum transfer efficiency,. At low headwind velocities, the ejecta velocity is smaller, thus planetesimal rotation has a greater influence in determining which ejecta escapes, as illustrated by Figure4. This leads to an increase in escaping ejecta on the trailing hemisphere, leading to larger spin-down. At higher headwind velocities, the ejecta velocity is greater and we find more ejecta escaping downrange on the leading hemisphere, leading to a lower overall spin-down.

In Figure7g-7h, we show sensitivity to the planetesimal spin. We find that the accretion rate is insensitive to the spin rate, and the angular momentum transfer efficiency decreases as a function of decreasing spin rate.

For all but one variable we see the changes to the mass loss ratio and angular momentum transfer efficiency are aligned, we see an increase/decrease in both effects across all planetesimal masses.
However, the headwind velocity exhibits the opposite trend, with an increase inassociated with a decrease in. To explore why this is true, we create a new figure to investigate the asymmetric influence of planetesimal rotation on the angular momentum transfer efficiency for the leading vs trailing hemispheres.

In Figure8, we show the angular momentum transfer efficiency in longitudinal bins across the planetesimal, denoted as. The summation of allresults in, which we have been plotting in Figure7. In each panel we show histograms at two different headwind velocities, and the difference in the two histograms is shown as a red line which we label ‘residual’. The darker histogram shows the higher headwind velocity.
When the headwind velocity is higher, the two sides of the histogram are more symmetrical and this reduces the angular momentum lost in ejecta, even though more ejecta escapes from higher velocity impacts. This figure is consistent with the reduction in angular momentum transfer efficiency at high headwind velocities seen in Figure7e,f.
In Figure9, is similar to Figure8except we show longitudinal bins for two integrations with differentvalues. The asymmetry evident in Figure9is absent, indicating the increase inassociated with a decrease inwhile varying.

Among the varied parametersFigure7a shows that
the angular momentum transfer is most sensitive to the ratio of planetesimal to projectile density,. A high density projectile colliding with a low density planetesimal will yield significantly more ejecta and so more angular momentum transfer than when the densities are equal.

SECTION: 4.1A Simple Velocity Gradient

A planetesimal embedded in a disk that is undergoing streaming instability is not an isolated object traversing through a constant headwind. A pebble cloud from which a planetesimal forms would have some inherent angular momentum of its own(Nesvorný et al.,2021; Lorek and Johansen,2024). The streaming instability generates extended concentrations of dust particles known as filaments(Johansen et al.,2007; Schäfer et al.,2017; Johansen et al.,2015).
We consider a gravitationally bound pebble cloud that is within a filament which has a velocity gradient giving an angular momentum component to the projectile velocity distribution.

We use the angular momentum of a gravitationally bound pebble cloud to estimate an upper bound for a spatial velocity gradient. If we assume that the pebble cloud extends to the hill radius,, where. We take the material within the pebble cloud to be orbiting at breakup velocity, using Equation3replacing the planetesimal density,, with the modified hill density,. We find that the pebble cloud angular momentum is

We estimate that the filament’s angular momentum is related to a deviation in the headwind velocity across the filament.To determine the velocity gradient across the filament, we use the angular momentum density within the filament fluid flow
with the dust volume density due to the increased particle density within the streaming instability(Li and Youdin,2021). As such, the angular momentum density within the filament is

Approximating the filament as a cylinder, we find the angular momentum within the filament to be

Assuming the circular cross-section of the cylinder is aligned with the yz-plane, with the length of the cylinder and the direction parallel to the headwind velocity being aligned with. We assume a linear velocity gradient,, and denote. We useto determine the magnitude of the linear velocity gradient. We take the length of cylinder,, required to contain a total mass of.

Using Equations43&46, we solve for the magnitude of the linear velocity gradient,:

At an orbital distance of 45 AU, we approximate a velocity gradient offor a solar-mass star. The maximum change in headwind velocity,, experienced by a planetesimal will be at the maximum impact parameter,,

which can be described as a fraction of the headwind velocity,,

The inclusion of a velocity gradient, with lower projectile velocities on the leading hemisphere and greater velocities on the trailing hemisphere, necessitates that the angular momentum of a distribution of impacts no longer has a mean of zero. Now, the projectile distribution contains angular momentum with respect to the planetesimal, and the angular momentum transfer from the projectiles no longer averages to zero. We include the first term of Equation34, modifying the average change in angular momentum per impact for a distribution of particles;

The change in angular momentum of the planetesimal per unit projectile mass is still equal to.

We show the maximum change in angular momentum transfer efficiency and mass loss ratio due to the inclusion of an upper bound spatial velocity gradient in Figure10. Despite looking at the upper bound for a velocity gradient within the projectile population, no detectable changes are calculated for the angular momentum transfer efficiency,, and the mass loss ratio,.

Simulations of collapsing pebble clouds indicate that the angular momentum of the pebble cloud range between 0.5 - 0.01 in hill units ()(Nesvorný et al.,2021). Converting Equation43to be in units of the hill angular momentum we find. Thus, assuming the upper bound of a pebble cloud rotating at breakup velocity results in a value betweengreater than the values seen in simulations. Due to there being no meaningful change to the angular momentum transfer efficiency and mass loss ratio at our assumed upper bound, we find it unnecessary to take into account the velocity gradient in a projectile population that would be required to form the pebble cloud.

SECTION: 4.2Effective Spindown Over the Lifetime of the Collisional Era

The spindown rate of a planetesimal is dependent on the amount of projectile mass colliding with the planetesimal, thus we need an estimate of the total mass in disk or wind particles that collide with a planetesimal in a given time frame.
We characterize the fraction of the protostellar disk mass in particles with the ratio, whereis the particle density in the disk (the mass per unit volume in particles), not the density of the particles themselves, andis the gas density. We use a dimensionless factorto describe the mass fraction of disk particles that can impact a planetesimal.
Taking into account only gravitational focusing,. This factor could be lower as as some particles could be swept away by gas drag.

We adopt the circumstellar disk model fromQuillen et al. (2024)which has the power law form for temperature and surface density of the minimum mass solar nebula byHayashi (1981)

whereandare coefficients that can be used to adjust disk surface density and temperature. For this disk model the headwind velocity is independent of radius andm/s.

Equation byQuillen et al. (2024)estimates the mass of particles from a disk impacting the planetesimal per unit area and time at the headwind speed

Assuming a planetesimal is embedded in disk undergoing streaming instability foryears at 10 AU, with(as streaming instability concentrates the particles), we estimate a total mass in projectiles

-

During an epoch of streaming instability, a recently formed planetesimal could be impacted by about its own weight in pebbles.
Nevertheless because escaping ejecta is inefficient at removing spin angular momentum, at most a few percent of its spin could be carried away by ejecta even with this high impact rate.

In this section we found that the total mass in impacts experienced by an embedded planetesimal could be large compared to its total, particularly if the planetesimal is small. In our study we have found that impacts can drain a planetesimal’s angular momentum, however an impact more conventionally deflects an object. Computation of the momentum transfer efficiency would require taking into account the different directions that ejecta escape the planetesimal, during gravitational defocusing, as discussed inA. As the ejecta velocity is slower than the impact velocity, gravitational defocusing could be an even stronger effect on the escaping ejecta than on the incoming projectile.

The momentum change caused by a distribution of impacts is likely in the downwind direction, akin to a drag force.
If the planetesimal is part of binary, impact induced drag would probably aid in removing angular momentum from the binary, causing it to tighten or merge. The large pebble mass flux present during streaming instability might facilitate binary merging. Hence it might be interesting in a future study to leverage ejecta scaling to compute the momentum transfer efficiency.

SECTION: 4.3Caveat: Impactor Density Distribution

Throughout our integrations, we assumed all collisions occurred with a single projectile density. Since the ratio of projectile to planetesimal density,, affects the integrated erosion and angular momentum transfer efficiency (See Section4), the impactor density distribution would affect the total spin-down observed, due to the total projectile mass not all being of the same density. As such, evolutionary models on the size and density distribution of disk particulates (e.g.Colmenares et al.2024) could be used to expand our extend our models.

SECTION: 5Discussion

We discuss our work in the context of the study byNesvorný et al. (2021), who studied KBO binary formation with N-body soft sphere (PKDGRAV).Nesvorný et al. (2021)found that the angular momentum of a pebble cloud prevents the rapid collapse into a single planetesimal. Instead, binary systems were more likely to form, with only a fraction of the pebble cloud being incorporated into the planetesimals.
In this section we consider the fraction of pebble cloud angular momentum that must be removed to collapse a single planetesimal and place this value in context with the fraction of angular momentum that can be removed by escaping ejecta.

SECTION: 5.1The Angular Momentum of Planetesimals Formed Via Streaming Instability

Nesvorný et al. (2021)investigated 3 streaming instability simulations in which clumps formed. They measured the angular momentum of these clumps and computed a ratio they called the mass scaled angular momentumwhereis a Hill angular momentum andis
the clump angular momentum. The Hill angular momentumwhere the Hill radiusfor orbital semi-major axisandthe Keplerian angular rotation rate.
The distribution of pebble cloudvalues in the streaming instability simulations has a mean value of 0.1, with the full range of values between 0.01 and 0.5 (see their Figure 4).
The ratio of the clump angular momentum to a break up value associated with a maximum spin rate

We estimatewhereis a final planetesimal radius after collapse and the maximum spin value is given in equation3.
We find that

This gives a Hill angular momentum to breakup ratio of

This ratio only depends upon orbital semi-major axis and the final planetesimal density.
Inserting this into equation56and using
the value of 0.1 for the ratio of cloud to Hill angular momentum measured in streaming instability simulations byNesvorný et al. (2021), we estimate a cloud to maximum breakup angular momentum ratio of

At 45 AU,, which is similar to the factor of10 estimated byNesvorný et al. (2021)in the Kuiper Belt, implying93% of the cloud’s angular momentum needs to be removed to form a single planetesimal.

Equation59implies that the problem of angular momentum removal is worse in the outer solar system than in the inner solar system.
In the outer solar system, due to the large fraction of angular momentum that must be lost, the angular momentum drain mechanism investigated in this paper would be incapable of facilitating collapse into a single planetesimal.

SECTION: 6Summary

Planetesimals embedded in protostellar disks experience impacts from disk particles. If the planetesimal is rotating, escaping ejecta can reduce its spin angular momentum, as proposed in the context of asteroids byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984).
In this work we integrate the momentum of ejecta from a distribution of impacts to estimate the angular momentum carried away by ejecta. Our study differs in a number of ways from the work byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984). Because impacts from particles in a disk would be at velocities of order 10-65 m/s rather than a few km/s, we take into account gravitational focusing. In this study we leverage scaling laws developed for crater ejecta distributions(Housen and Holsapple,2011)that have been modified for oblique impacts so that they are sensitive to impact and azimuthal angle(Raducan et al.,2022; Quillen and Doran,2024). In contrastDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)neglected the azimuthal angular dependence of the ejecta distributions. Because the planetesimal has recently formed, we assume the direction from which the projectiles originate is related to the spin axis of the planetesimal and that all projectiles originate from the same direction. In contrastDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)integrated over a distribution of projectiles that come from all directions. We consider impacts that cause accretion as well as those that cause erosion. In contrast, at the high impact velocities considered byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984), the impacts only cause erosion.

We find that the angular momentum drain mechanism proposed byDobrovolskis and Burns (1984)operates on planetesimals that are embedded within a circumstellar disk and are experiencing impacts originating from a headwind. We characterize the efficiency of the process by computing the ratio of the angular momentum lost per unit projectile mass and the planetesimal’s spin angular momentum. We find that the angular momentum drain mechanism is inefficient, with efficiencyand at most a few percent. Thus, if the impacting material is associated with a pebble cloud and contains angular momentum, the impact mediated angular momentum drain mechanism, would not significantly facilitate planetesimal collapse.
With N-body simulationsNesvorný et al. (2021)found that
the angular momentum of a pebble cloud prevents the collapse into a single planetesimal. Our study supports this result but with a different numerical approach. In our study the angular momentum transfer arises through ejecta scaling rather than dissipation associated with inelastic collisions.

We find the angular momentum transfer efficiency is most sensitive to headwind velocity and the ratio of planetesimal to projectile density.
As planetesimal mass increases, the effects of gravitational focusing cause a decrease in the angular momentum transfer efficiency and an increase in the mass loss ratio due to the higher impact velocity caused by gravitational focusing. Assuming the projectiles originate from a disk filament, that might be present due to streaming instability with a velocity gradient capable of generating the computed pebble cloud, we find no meaningful reduction of the angular momentum transfer efficiency with regard to spinning down an embedded planetesimal.
Future studies could take into account the angular momentum that is inherent in a population of projectiles.

The impact related mechanism of angular momentum loss, because it is inefficient, does not help resolve the issue of how excess angular momentum is shed in a collapsing pebble cloud. Additional sources of angular momentum drain may be necessary for the collapse of single-planetesimals.
Pebble cloud collapse could lead preferentially to binary formation, as explored byNesvorný et al. (2019,2021). Alternatively, planetesimal formation itself could be inefficient with many pebble clouds failing to collapse, and only those that do collapse initially having low angular momentum.

Acknowledgements:This material is based upon work supported by NASA grant 80NSSC21K0143.

The python code used in this study is archived athttp://xxxxarxiv.orgwill be updated upon posting to arxiv

SECTION: References

SECTION: Appendix AThe Momentum and Angular Momentum Transfer

The momentum transfer efficiency, commonly called, is a dimensionless parameter used to characterize deflection of an asteroid by an impact (e.g.,Holsapple and Housen2012; Feldhacker et al.2017; Rivkin et al.2021; Raducan et al.2022).
We recompute the momentum transfer parameter, taking into account the possibility of body rotation. We also compute the planetesimal’s angular momentum change caused by the impact.

We consider two sums, one for the initial total momentum of an impact in an inertial frame
and one for the final total momentum,

Hereis the planetesimal’s initial momentum, but excluding that of the mass that will be ejected by the impact. The change of the planetesimal momentum is,is the projectile momentum at the moment of impact. The velocityis the rotational velocity of the surface at the site of impact,the total mass of escaping ejecta,
andis the initial momentum of the mass in escaping ejecta but prior to impact and still on the planetesimal surface and rotating with it.
The escaping ejecta has momentumwhich we describe with a mean velocity(in the inertial frame).
After impact, we assume the projectile comes to rest on the surface but if part of it is ejected, that part could
be incorporated into the escaping ejecta.
Conservation of momentum implies that the initial and final momentum sums are equal, giving

The velocity difference is equivalent to a velocity in the frame rotating with the surface (via equation5).
The momentum of escaping ejecta seen in the rotating frame

whereis the net velocity of escaping ejecta, as seen in the rotating frame.
Thus the change in planetesimal momentum

The change in planetesimal velocity in the inertial frame, also called the deflection, would be

The momentum of escaping ejecta is often decomposed into two components, one normal to the surface and the other in the down-range ordirection(Rivkin et al.,2021; Raducan et al.,2022). If the planetesimal is spherical, then the normal directionis the same in inertial and rotating frames and the momentum transfer efficiency parameteris consistent with

Neglecting rotation, we recover expressions forand the deflection given byFeldhacker et al. (2017); Rivkin et al. (2021); Raducan et al. (2022).

We carry out a similar calculation but for the angular momentum. We find that the change in planetesimal angular momentum is

whereis the vector from the center of the planetesimal to the impact site.
We confirm that a normal impact at longitude = 0∘, with projectile
that sticks to the surface and gives no ejecta, would cause a change in angular momentum, as expected.

Assuming that the planetesimal is experiencing many collisions, if the distribution of projectiles has no angular momentum then theterm in equation67will average to zero.
We note that in equations64and67, the relevant escaping ejecta momentum is computed in the frame rotating with the surface at the site of impact.

Up to this point,
we have neglected gravitational focusing. Equations60and61describe the impact and ejecta curtain just prior to and after the impact. The projectile velocityrefers to velocity of the projectile relative to the planetesimal at the moment of impact (in an inertial, not rotating frame) and is not equal to the velocity of the projectile at large distance from the planetesimal. As a consequence equation66describes the momentum transfer efficiencyonly for high velocity projectiles.

Equation67describes the difference between the angular momentum of the planetesimal projectile just before and after the impact. However, the gravitational force between planetesimal and projectile, which changes the relative momentum between projectile and planetesimal, conserves angular momentum. Thus equation67can be used to estimate the change in angular momentum by the impact and need not take into account the trajectories of ejecta escaping the planetesimal.

SECTION: Appendix BThe Hyperbolic Orbit Relevant for Gravitational Focusing

We consider a particle approaching a planetesimal. We neglect the gravitational force from other bodies and gas drag. The particle (or projectile)
is not gravitationally bound to the planetesimal, so it is on a hyperbolic orbit.
We describe a hyperbolic orbit of a zero mass projectile about a planetesimal of massin terms of a semi-major axisand eccentricity. The semi-major axis of the hyperbolic orbit is directly related to the orbital energy and can be expressed as

We solve for the orbital eccentricityin terms of impact parameter, and the projectile relative velocity distant from the planetesimal:

The distance from the center of mass of the planetesimal to the projectile is

whereis the true anomaly.

We solve for the radius where the orbit intersects the planetesimal surface, at a radius of, giving the true anomaly of the impact site

The maximum true anomaly occurs distant from the planetesimal, when

The angle between source wind direction (and the source of the projectile) and the site of impact, as measured from the planetesimal’s center of mass, is

This angle is used in section2.8to calculate the impact location, velocity and angle.