SECTION: On the boundedness of Gross’ solution when the underlying distribution is bounded

SECTION: On the boundedness of Gross’ solution to the planar Skorokhod embedding
problem

In this work, we investigate the problem of the boundedness of the
Gross’ solutions of the planar Skorokhod embedding problem, where
we show that the solution is bounded under some mild conditions on
the underlying probability distribution.

Keywords and phrases: Planar Brownian motion, Skorokhod
embedding problem

Mathematics Subject Classification (2010):

SECTION: 1Introduction

In, the author R. Gross considered an interesting planar version
of the Skorokhod problem[5], which was originally formulated
inbut in dimension one. For a concise survey of the one-dimensional
14 version, see[9]. The problem studied by Gross is
as follows : Letbe a non-degenerate probability distribution
with zero mean and finite second moment. Is there a simply connected
domain(containing the origin) such that, for ais a standard planar Brownian motion, thenhas the distribution? Hereis the exit time of the
planar Brownian motionfrom. Gross provided an affirmative
answer, offering an explicit construction of his solution. In addition,
he showed that the underlying exit timehas a finite average.
One year later, Boudabra and Markowsky published two papers on the
same problem[2,1]. In the first
one, the authors demonstrated that the problem is solvable for any
non-degenerate distribution of a finitemoment where.
Furthermore, they provided a uniqueness criterion. The second paper
provides a new category of domains that solve yet the Skorokhod embedding
problem as well as a uniqueness criterion. As in[1],
we shall keep using the terminology-domain to tag any simply
connected domain solving the planar Skorokhod problem. As this manuscript
deals with Gross’ solution, we confine ourselves to it, that is, a-domain means simply constructed by Gross’ technique. Let’s
first summarize the geometric characteristics of the-domains
generated by Gross’ method: :

is symmetric over the real line.

is-convex, i.e the segment joining any point ofand its symmetric point over the real axis remains inside.

Ifthencontains a vertical line segment,
a half line, or a line.

If the support of the distributionhas a gap fromtothencontains the vertical strip.

Note that the last two properties are universal, i.e they apply to
any potential solution of the planar Skorokhod embedding problem.
When it comes to boundedness, which is the focus of this note, any-domainis unbounded whenever the support ofis
either unbounded or contains a gap. Specifically,will be horizontally
unbounded when the support ofis unbounded, and vertically
unbounded if there is a gap within the support of. Thus, two
necessary conditions for obtaining a bounded-domain are the
support ofmust be both bounded and connected (without gaps).
Given these two assumptions, we will explore sufficient conditions
onthat lead a bounded-domain.

SECTION: 2Tools and Results

We begin by outlining the ingredients of Gross’ technique to generate
his-domain, a solution to the planar Skorokhod embedding problem.

The first one is the quantile function ofdefined by

whereis the cumulative distribution function of, i.e,. In other words,is the pseudo-inverse of. Whenis increasing thensimplifies
to the standard inverse function. A handy feature ofis that,
when fed with uniformly distributed inputs in, it generates
values sampling as. Note that ifhas a gap, say,
thenjumps byat. The “doubled periodic function”is extracted out ofby setting

Remark that the functionis even and non-decreasing.

The second ingredient is the periodic Hilbert transform, which will
control the range of the projection of the-domain on the imaginary
axis.

The Hilbert transform of a- periodic functionis defined
by

wheredenotes the Cauchy principal value[3].
The role ofis to absorb infinite limits near singularities
in a certain sense. It is required for the Hilbert transform as the
trigonometric functionhas poles atwith. The Hilbert transform is a bounded operator
on

for any. More precisely, we have

[3]Ifis in, thenexists almost everywhere for. Furthermore, we have

for some positive constant.

The strong type estimate2fails to hold when, asbecomes unbounded. For further details see[7,4][3,6].

Now we illustrate Gross’ construction technique. He first generates
the Fourier series expansion of:

whereis theFourier coefficient of. Note
that there is no constant term due the fact thatis assumed
to be a centered probability distribution. Then he showed his cornerstone
result, upon which the solution is built. More precisely

[5]The analytic function

is univalent on the unit disc.

Using the conformal invariance principal of planar Brownian motion[8], Gross shows that,
i.e the image of theunder the action of, is
a solution for the Skorokhod embedding problem. If one knows thatthen the boundary of his-domain is parameterized
by

For a Cartesian equation of3, see[1].

Now we state our first result. Letbe a continuous probability
distribution concentrated on an interval. Denote its density
by. In particular, the quantile functionsimplifies
to the standard inverse of. We state now our first theorem.

Ifis positive
then the underlying-domain is bounded.

Asis assumed to be positive thenis bounded onsince

Letbe a fixed number in. The Hilbert transform
ofis well defined asis bounded. By splitting the
integral ininto two parts, we have

Moreover, using a simple integration by parts, we obtain

Similarly,

By substituting (5) and (6) into (4), the
Hilbert transform becomes

∎

Now, sinceis differentiable atand,
the first limit in (7) becomes

For the second limit in (7), observe that

On the other hand, the functionis integrable
onThen

is finite. Therefore,

is finite.

The proof of Theorem4shows thatis continuous as it is the convolution between anfunction
and anfunction over.

The case wherei.eat some pointis inconclusive. The following two examples
illustrate this fact. The first example generates a bounded-domain
while the second example produces an unbounded one.

Letbe the probability distribution given by the density

withbeing a non-negative parameter. The c.d.f ofis

and thus

Now, asthen we have the approximation:

As the R.H.S of8is integrable around,
the functionis also integrable. The caseis similar. Hence

exists and is finite for all.

Before giving the example, we shall first provide the motivation behind.
Theorem4says that any-domain is
necessarily unbounded ifis bounded. That is, if we want
to seek a continuous distributionsupported on an intervalgenerating an unbounded domain, then necessarily
its pdfmust hit the-axis at some point.
However hitting the value zero byis not enough as shown by
the previous example. Even more, the previous example shows that ifwon’t do
the job for any. So in order to boost the chance of getting
an unbounded domain,must be too much flat around,
i.e its graph looks like it is overlapped with the-axis at.
In other words, we needsuch that

for any positive. Inspired by this analysis, we shall show
thatis a suitable candidate to generate an unbounded domain (being the normalization constant).

Sinceis symmetric, the associated cumulative distribution
function takes the following form:

We have

An elementary property of inverses infers that

Hence

The R.H.S of10is not integrable around.
Then we deduce thatblows up, which infers
thatis unbounded.

SECTION: 3Comments

In this work, we have investigated the problem of the boundedness
of the-domains and found some sufficient conditions on the
distributionto generate a bounded domain. In summary, in order
to have a blow-up at some point, the graph of the quantile
function must be too much steep. This includes the case of support
with a gap. Assume that the support isfor example,
the quantile function will have a jump at the point.
At this point, the derivative is the Dirac function, which is the
most steep function ever. This explains the unboundedness of the corresponding-domain. An interesting question would be to discuss the necessity
of such conditions, namely the flatness of the p.d.f, i.e can one
find a distribution whose p.d.f satisfies9with a bounded-domai.

SECTION: References