SECTION: Self-embedding similitudes of Bedford-McMullen carpets with dependent ratios

We prove that any non-degenerate Bedford-McMullen carpet does not allow oblique self-embedding similitudes; that is, ifis a similitude sending the carpet into itself, then the image of the-axis undermust be parallel to one of the principal axes. We also establish a logarithmic commensurability result on the contraction ratios of such embeddings. This completes a previous study of Algom and Hochman [Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys.39(2019), 577–603] on Bedford-McMullen carpets generated by multiplicatively independent exponents, together with a new proof on their non-obliqueness statement.

For the self-similar case, however, we construct a generalized Sierpiński carpet that is symmetric with respect to an appropriate oblique line and hence allows a reflectional oblique self-embedding. As a complement, we prove that if a generalized Sierpiński carpet satisfies the strong separation condition and permits an oblique rotational self-embedding similitude, then the tangent of the rotation angle takes values.

SECTION: 1.Introduction

One way to gain a better comprehension of the geometric structure of fractal sets is to delve into the study of their self-embedding mappings, especially affine mappings or even similitudes. Note that a similitudeoncan be written as, whereis thesimilarity ratio(alsocontraction ratioif),is an orthogonal transformation on(theorthogonal part) and. Here a rough principle is that the imposition of additional restrictions on these sets usually corresponds to an increase in the constraints placed on their self-embedding mappings.

A pioneering work in this direction is a logarithmic commensurability theorem established by Feng and Wang[10]. This theorem asserts that ifis a self-similar set generated by a homogeneous iterated function system (IFS) with the open set condition andis a similitude with, then the contraction ratio ofmust be a rational power of the common ratio of mappings in the IFS. This result was later extended to higher dimensional cases by Elekes, Keleti and Máthé[7], albeit with the open set condition being substituted by the strong separation condition. If in addition the mappings in the corresponding IFS share a common contraction ratio and orthogonal part, the author[19]proved the relative openness of the embedded image. In[1], Algom characerized all affine self-embeddings of self-similar sets with the strong separation condition.

For self-affine sets, however, there are much fewer existing results. One reason for this disparity is that a natural rescaling approach, which works well in the self-similar case, usually fails in the self-affine case due to the inherent distortion. Nevertheless, the classic family of Bedford-McMullen carpets, with their simple lattice structure and delicate intrinsic properties, presents an optimal subject for investigation. A formal definition is as follows.

Letbe integers and letbe non-empty. Setto be the affine map given by

The attractorassociated with the self-affine IFSis usually called aBedford-McMullen carpetwhen, and ageneralized Sierpiński carpetwhen. More precisely,

To avoid trivial cases, in this paper we always assume that, wheredenotes the cardinality.

In[7], Elekes, Keleti and Máthé studied the intersections of Bedford-McMullen carpets with their translated copies. They observed a measure drop phenomenon occurring in these intersections, except in trivial cases. A systematic study on self-embedding similitudes of Bedford-McMullen carpets was conducted by Algom and Hochman[3], who showed that if the horizontal and vertical ratiosare multiplicatively independent, then the carpet permits only nearly trivial self-embedding similitudes. To state and extend their findings, let us introduce a convenient terminology.

A lineis calledobliqueif it is not parallel to one of the two principle coordinate axes.

A similitudeonwith positive similarity ratio is calledobliqueifsends the-axis to an oblique line.

Algom and Hochman’s main result is the following theorem.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet with. Supposeis not supported on any line and is not a Cartesian product of the unit intervaland some Cantor set. Ifis a similitude sendinginto itself, thenis not oblique and has similarity ratio.

The non-degenerate and non-product assumptions onare natural. For example, ifor if(wheredenotes the middle third Cantor set), thenclearly need not to be an isometry. Meanwhile, the assumption of the independence betweenandis a key factor preventing oblique and contracting self-embeddings of the carpet. In fact, it is well known that a Cantor-set cannot be embedded into another Cantor-set if, see[9]. Heuristically, this phenomenon rules out oblique embeddings of non-degenerate Bedford-McMullen carpets with independent ratios, and forces the contraction ratio of any embedding similitude to be dependent onandsimultaneously (so isometry).

Our main purpose is to study to what extent Theorem1.3remains true for the dependent case (i.e.,) or even the self-similar case (i.e.,). The presence of dependence inherently complicates the self-embedding problem. Fortunately, first we are able to extend the non-obliqueness statement to the dependent case, together with a new proof for the independent case without analyzing the tangent sets ofas in[3].

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet that is not supported on any line. Ifis a similitude sendinginto itself, thenis not oblique.

We remark that the non-obliqueness statement is closely related to the slicing problem of Bedford-McMullen carpets. For example, writingto be the maximal number of rectangles that are selected in a row in the initial pattern (see Section 2.1 for the definition), it is easy to find somesuch that, whereis the Hausdorff dimension. But an oblique self-embedding similitude sends this horizontal slice into an oblique one, and if one can show that any oblique slice ofhas Hausdorff dimension strictly less than, then the existence of oblique self-embeddings is denied. A natural question is: when do we have such an upper bound for oblique slices? By Marstrand’s slicing theorem[13], for any oblique linein,

So ifhas non-uniform horizontal fibres (that is, there are two rows containing different numbers of selected rectangles), it is easy to check (see (2.7) for the formula of) that

So almost all oblique slices have Hausdorff dimension strictly less than.
When, it is highly probable that the upper bound specified in (1.2) holds for all oblique slices rather than for only typical ones, which leads to a quick proof for certain special cases of Theorem1.4. This slicing problem is formally stated in the nice survey[12]and seems quite challenging. See[2,4]for recent attempts. However, in the dependent case this upper bound may not hold, as indicated in[5].

On the other hand, one cannot hope to extend the isometry statement in Theorem1.3to the dependent case. For example, when, it is easy to construct a Bedford-McMullen carpet which is actually a self-similar carpet. In such instances, there exist numerous non-isometric self-embedding similitudes. Nevertheless, we are able to prove a logarithmic commensurability conclusion as follows.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet withand letbe a similitude sendinginto itself. Ifis not contained in any line, then, wheredenotes the contraction ratio of.

We outline here some rough ideas on how to prove the above two results. For the non-obliqueness statement, we rescalein an appropriate manner so that, in the absence of vacant rows, a geometric observation can lead us to the desired conclusion for both independent and dependent cases. On the other hand, if there is a vacant row, the independent case can be directly addressed using results on the dimensions of projections of Bedford-McMullen carpets as formulated in[11]. For the dependent case, we first rescalein a new way so that there is another oblique self-embeddingfor which, whereis a “generalized” Cantor-set. Utilizing a nontrivial extension of the logarithmic commensurability theorem in[10], we establish the non-existence of such a, thereby deriving Theorem1.5.

Finally, we consider the self-similar case when, which can be regarded as the “most dependent” case. While one might anticipate a non-oblique statement in this context, it is not hard to to construct a generalized Sierpiński carpet which is symmetric with respect to an appropriate oblique line, thus permitting an oblique reflectional self-embedding. See Example5.1. So the non-oblique statement fails in the self-similar setting. However, considering rotational self-embeddings in lieu of reflectional ones and under the assumption of the strong separation condition, we indeed eliminate almost all possibilities. Here a generalized Sierpiński carpetis said to satisfy thestrong separation conditionif elements inare mutually disjoint.

Letbe a generalized Sierpiński carpet satisfying the strong separation condition. Letand letbe the counterclockwise rotation at the origin by angle. Ifis an oblique similitude sendinginto itself, then.

Theorem1.6is achieved as follows. Note that the convex hull of any non-degenerate Sierpiński carpet is a polygon. On the one hand, we show that if there exists an oblique rotational, then the rotational angle is a rational multiple of, and simultaneously can be expressed as the sum of finitely many inner angles (modulus) of the above polygon. On the other hand, we prove that all of these inner angles have rational tangents. So the rotation angle has a rational tangent, and the desired conclusion follows directly from a theorem of Niven (see Lemma5.7). Here the strong separation condition plays a crucial role in deriving the logarithmic commensurability of the contraction ratio of(by a result in[7]). In fact, by employing some mass comparison arguments, the separation condition in Theorem1.6could be relaxed to the requirement of total disconnectedness; however, this does not present a substantial improvement and we will not explore it further within the scope of this paper.

In the subsequent section, we provide some useful observations on Bedford-McMullen carpets and deleted-digit sets. In Section 3, we present our new proof of the non-obliqueness statement in the independent case. Section 4 is devoted to the proofs of Theorems1.4and1.5. Finally, we establish Theorem1.6in Section 5.

We writeto be the collection of all similitudes onwith positive similarity ratio. For any collectionof sets in,is the union of sets in. Forand, we denote by(or) the translation ofby, that is,. For any oblique line,denotes the orthogonal projection onto. On the other hand, we writeandto be the orthogonal projections onto the-axis and-axis, respectively. Finally, the concatenationof any two mappingssimply means their composition.

SECTION: 2.Preliminaries

SECTION: 2.1.Bedford-McMullen carpets

A Bedford-McMullen carpetcan be obtained by a standard iteration process as follows. One first divides the unit squareinto angrid, selecting a subset of rectangles formed by the grid (called theinitial pattern) and then repeatedly substituting the initial pattern on each of the selected rectangles. The limit set is just. For, we call every element in

a level-rectangle. For any level-rectangle, we writeto be the natural affine map sendingto.

We first record two geometric observations of Bedford-McMullen carpets, which rely heavily on the self-affinity (more precisely, the fact that) and might be of independent interest.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet. If there is at most one selected rectangle in each row, then for any oblique line,is an infinite set.

The condition that there is at most one selected rectangle in each row is not necessary, but the above version will suffice for our purpose.

It suffices to consider whenpasses through the origin. In this case, there is an anglesuch thatis essentially given by. Sinceis oblique,andare both nonzero.

Letand pick a largeso that. Letbe any level-rectangle. Since there is at most one selected rectangle in each row, there are at leastmany level-rectangles inthat lies in different rows in thegrid. Since every level-rectangle intersects, we can selectmany points inwith-separated-coordinates. Then their projections underare mutually distinct: otherwise, there are two of these points, say, such that, which implies that

a contradiction. In particular,contains at leastmany points. Sinceandis arbitrary,must be an infinite set.
∎

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet. Thendoes not contain any oblique segment of positive length.

When, this proposition sometimes fails. For example, when, the carpet is nothing but a diagonal of the unit square.

Since, there aresuch that. Denote bythe open rectangle. Since,. By the self-affinity of, for anyand any level-rectangle,. Note that ifis of the form, then

Supposecontains an oblique line segmentof length. Letbe the slope of. Sinceis oblique, we may assume without loss of generality that. Fixso large thatand that there exists a level-rectanglesuch thatmeets both the left and right edges of. The existence of such a rectangle can be found at the end of the proof. For convenience, we also assume that(considering the truncationinstead). In particular,and hence. Note thathas slope.

Pick a large integerso thatand. Letbe the intersection ofand the left edge of. Someets the right edge ofat.
Since, there is some integersuch that. For convenience, writeto be the linear function whose graph contains.

For, setand. By our choices ofand,

Therefore, there must exist somesuch that

because the interval on the right hand side has length. Write

By (2.3),passes the interior of. Sois a level-rectangle. By (2.1),

Letting, we have by (2.3) that

and hence the point. But from the definition of, this point is also in, which contradicts that.

The existence ofcan be deduced in a similar way we choose. Letbe the left endpoint of the original(before the truncation). Letandbe such that. Then define recursively that

wheredenotes the integer part. Sobecauseis the slope of. Since,. So whenis large enough, there must exist somesuch thatis entirely contained in some-adic subinterval ofof the form. In particular,and. Then it suffices to take

∎

In the rest of this paper, we adopt the following notations. For,

, which collects the digits of non-empty rows in the initial pattern.

, which collects the digits of non-empty columns in the initial pattern.

For,, which collects the digits of selected rectangles in the-th row.

For,, which collects the digits of selected rectangles in the-th column.

.

(vertical slice) and(horizontal slice).

Note for every, saywhere,

For future use, we write

and call the interior of every interval in the above union abasic open intervalof. It is easy to see thatis decreasing,and

wheredenotes the lower box dimension. Furthermore, it is standard to show thatfor alland we omit the proof. Here and afterwards,denotes the-dimensional Hausdorff measure.

The following lemma records some basic facts about horizontal slices.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet. Then for anywith,

For everyand every pair of basic open intervalsof,is simply a translated copy of.

For everyand every basic open intervalof,containmany basic open intervals of.

In addition, iffor all large, then the following properties hold.

, whereis the diameter.

Calling an open intervalagapofifis a connected component of, whereis some basic open interval of, we have

Letand letbe any basic open interval of. Writingto be the left endpoint of, we immediately see from (2.4) and (2.5) that

This proves (1). Also,

which implies (2).

Next, letbe so large thatwhenever. Letbe any gap of. By (2),clearly contains at leastbasic open intervals of. Since these intervals are disjoint and each of them contains some point in,(which proves (4)) and, which gives (5).
∎

It is also worthy of mentioning that the Hausdorff dimension of Bedford-McMullen carpets was obtained by Bedford[6]and McMullen[14]independently as follows:

SECTION: 2.2.Deleted-digit sets

Deleted-digit sets naturally appear in the study of horizontal and vertical slices and projections of Bedford-McMullen carpets.

Letbe an integer. For any non-empty, we writeto be the self-similar set associated with the IFSon. In other words,

A common example is the middle-third Cantor set, whereand. Note that for any deleted-digit set, the associated IFSalways satisfies the open set condition, see[8]. Sincefor alland all, we can use the unit intervalfor the standard iteration process to get. More precisely, lettingand recursively define

we get a decreasing sequencesuch that.

By a renowned theorem of Schief[17],has non-empty interior if and only if. In particular, ifthen it must be totally disconnected. It is easy to check by induction thatis a union of intervals of the form, and each pair of such intervals are either adjacent (that is, they share a common endpoint) or disjoint.

Many horizontal and vertical slices of a Bedford-McMullen carpetare deleted-digit sets or a finite union of them. For example, iffor some, then we have by (2.4) that.
Similarly, iffor some, then.
On the other hand, the projections ofonto the principal axes are also deleted-digit sets:

and similarly,.

Letbe a deleted-digit set with. Ifis a similitude sendinginto itself, then the similarity ratio ofis a rational power of.

This is a special case of[10, Theorem 1.1].
∎

A generalization of this logarithmic commensurability theorem as follows is one of the main ingredients in our proof of the dependent and self-similar cases. Recall that.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet withand letwith. Let. Ifand there is a contractionsendinginto itself, then the contraction ratio ofis a rational power of.

Some idea of the proof stems from an ongoing work of the author and Rao[16].

We first prove thatfor all large. Suppose on the contrary thatfor infinitely many. Then for any, whenis large enough, we have

Since, there is a constantsuch thatwhen(for the definition of, see[8]). However, we have by (2.9) that

as long asandare large enough. This is a contradiction.

Denote bythe contraction ratio of. Suppose on the contrary that. Letbe a small fixed constant (will be specified later) and pick positive integerssuch that. Equivalently,.

Sincefor all, it is not hard to check that

that is, for all, every connected component ofcontains at mostbasic open intervals of.
Pick a largesuch that there is a connected componentofconsisting of exactlybasic open intervals ofandfor all. Note thatis a closed interval and. We distinguish two cases.

Case 1:intersects exactly one connected component of, say. In this case,. Sinceconsists ofbasic open intervals ofand their intersections withare distinct from one another by only a translation (recall Lemma2.3(1)),contains a-separated subset of cardinality. Since, every basic open interval ofin, which has length, contains at most one point in that subset. Thus by the maximality of,contains exactlybasic open intervals of. Recall that. Writingto be the-Hausdorff measure of the intersection ofand any basic open interval in, we see from Lemma2.3(1) thatand. On the other hand, by Lemma2.3(2), each basic open interval incontains exactlyones in. Soand

which contradicts that.

Case 2:intersects at least two connected components of. In this case,contains a hole between those components. More precisely, there exists some integersuch thatand. Write. Comparing the length, we can find either exactly one or two adjacent basic open intervals ofinof which the images undermeet. Iffor only one basic open intervalin(see Figure1(A)), then, since,. This in turn tells us thatcontains a gap of length. Therefore,

Choosingsmall enough at the beginning, this contradicts Lemma2.3(4).

Now, suppose there are two basic open intervalsofinsuch that,. Without loss of generality, assume thatis to the left of. Denote bythe left endpoint of. See Figure1(B) for an illustration.

By Lemma2.3(1),

Thus

But the right hand side is an interval of length

Choosingsmall enough at the beginning, this contradicts Lemma2.3(3).
∎

For convenience, for any compact setand, we callaleft(resp.right)isolated pointofif there is somesuch that(resp.).

Letbe as in Proposition2.6. Then there are left isolated pointsand right isolated pointsofsuch thatand. Moreover, we can guarantee thatfor all large, whereare the level-rectangles such thatand, respectively.

Roughly speaking, the “moreover” part just requires that the two pointslie in the same row at all stages during the iteration process. This is needed for some technical reason.

Similarly as before, letbe the contraction ratio of. By Proposition2.6,for some positive integers. Applying the argument in the proof of Proposition2.6to,and, we see that Case 2 in that proof is impossible because: (1) the right hand side of (2.11) now equals, i.e.,contains a gap of the same length as itself, which contradicts that; (2) the right hand side of (2.12) now equals, i.e.,, which contradicts that. On the other hand, for Case 1 in that proof, we now have. We claim that

Otherwise, since, there exists some. So we can find a largeand a basic open intervalofsuch thatbut. However, since, we have again by Lemma2.3(1) that. Thus

which is a contradiction.

By the claim,maps all the left and right isolated points ofto the corresponding isolated points of, respectively. Pick any pair of them, sayand. It is easy to check by contradiction thatare left and right isolated points of, respectively. This establishes the first requirement.

For the second one, note that if, thenandare unique for all. Moreover,belongs to the interior of both ofand, which implies that. If, it is possible thator vice versa (note thatare both-adic intervals of length). However, for such a point, it is easy to see thatis a finite union of scaled copies ofandwith disjoint interior. More precisely,, where(resp.) are scaled copies of(resp.) contracting by a factor. By Baire’s theorem, someor, say, must contain an (relative) interior part ofand hence of. Then, picking those points so carefully thatare all isolated points of, we can guarantee thatfor all large. This completes the proof.
∎

SECTION: 3.The independent case

One significant benefit of the independence assumption regardingandis that it elucidates the dimensions of the orthogonal projections ofonto all lines.

Letbe a Bedford-McMullen carpet. If, thenfor every oblique line.

Letbe as in Theorem1.4. If, thenis not oblique.

We distinguish three cases. Recall that.

. In other words, there is an empty row in the initial pattern of.

Ifis oblique, then by Lemma3.1,

If there is somesuch that, then

which contradicts (3.1). However, iffor all, then. Therefore,

which again contradicts (3.1).
∎

and. In other words, there is no empty row but a full row in the initial pattern of.

In this case, picksuch that. Writing, we have seen that, which is a horizontal line segment. So ifis oblique, thencontains an oblique segment, which contradicts Proposition2.2.
∎

but. In other words, one can find a selected rectangle and an unselected one in each row in the initial pattern of.

In this case,does not contain any horizontal line segment. On the other hand,and hence every horizontal slice ofis non-empty. Letbe the contraction ratio of. Consideringfor some large integerinstead, we may assume that. Without loss of generality, assume thatis supported on a line of slope.

Let us pick a sequence, where eachis a level-rectangle andfor all.
Writeto be the left bottom vertex ofandto be any level-rectangle containing. For convenience, we also letbe the bottom and left edges of, respectively. So. See Figure2for an illustration. Below we record two simple but key facts.

Sinceis parallel to the-axis andis supported on a line of slope, the line supportinghas slope, which tends toas. Moreover,has length

Similarly, the line supportinghas slope, which also tends toas. Moreover,has length

Roughly speaking, for all large,is a very flat parallelogram with one edge short and the other one pretty long.

Write. Since,. Fix a largeso thatand(recall (3.2)). Let us truncate the parallelogramas, where

Sincehas slope, we have for everythat

Since,. Combining this with (3.3), whenis picked large enough at the beginning, we can find integersandsuch thatwhile

Let. Note thatis eitheror.

On the other hand,is supported on a line of slope, say. Since, there is somesuch thatdoes not intersect the open rectangle. Writeto be the pointand. Then the pointlies on the segment, and

So it is easy to check that the ball centered atand of radiusis contained in. In particular,

See Figure3for an illustration.

Recall thatis the bottom edge of the level-rectangle. Sinceis parallel toand is contained in(the original flat parallelogram), there is somesuch that

where the non-empty conclusion is becausefor all(as pointed out at the beginning).
Thus

which leads to a contradiction.
∎

Note that in the proof of Cases 2 and 3, we do not need the independence assumptionbut only the fact that. This will save us much effort in the dependent self-affine case.

SECTION: 4.The dependent self-affine case

In this section, we fix a Bedford-McMullen carpetthat is not supported in any line and assume that. Without loss of generality, write, whereare coprime. Since,. Recall that.

Unlike the independent case, now we only know the dimension of the projections ofin almost all directions (by Marstrand’s projection theorem). This limitation renders the argument in Case 1 of Theorem3.2invalid. Instead, we adopt a rescaling approach as follows.

Let. If, then we can findand a closed setwithsuch that. Moreover, ifis oblique, thencan be picked oblique as well.

Letbe the contraction ratio of. For, write

Since the contraction ratio ofis,and,is contained in at mostopen squares of side length. More precisely, there aresuch that

Denote bythe homothety sendingto the square, the “left bottom square” of. Note that for all,

The contraction ratio ofequals, which is at mostand at least. So the sequencehas accumulation points inand we may assume thatconverges to some.

Moreover, write, where. Since, the collection of all level-rectangles inis

Writingto be the map sendingto, we have

whereis defined in (2.5).

Letbe an accumulation point ofand write, where. Using Cantor’s diagonal argument, it is not hard to pickproperly so that for all, there is some(depending on) with

i.e., the firstterms of the-ary expansion ofandare identical. We claim that

If the left hand side is empty then there is nothing to prove. Suppose it is non-empty
and (4.4) does not hold. Then there is somesuch that

whereis the usual distance. Letbe a large integer with. Pickso large that(whereis the Hausdorff distance, see[8]),and (4.3) holds for.
The first requirement gives us awith. By (4.3),

Hence

But it follows that

which is impossible.

Applying the same argument to the other eight squares in, we find nine pointssuch that

whereis the translation ofby. Write. By (2.6),.

It remains to prove that ifis oblique thencan be picked oblique as well. Writeto be the orthogonal part of. Ifis a finite collection, then every element in it appears infinitely many times. Picking an oblique transformationand a subsequenceso thatfor all, we can considerinstead ofin the above arguments instead and get an obliquebecause, as the limit of, hasas its orthogonal part. Ifis an infinite collection, then since an orthogonalmatrix is either a rotation or a reflection,must be an irrational rotation (i.e., the rotation angle is an irrational multiple of) and hence every rotation matrix is an accumulation point of. Then one just picks a subsequenceso thatconverges to an oblique transformation, which is the orthogonal part of. This completes the proof.
∎

In the above proof, if we apply Baire’s theorem to (4.5), someshould contain an interior part of. In particular, there is an integerand a level-rectanglesuch that. As a consequence,

We also remark that the integerdefined in (4.1) obviously equals. So if, thenand henceis dense in an open subinterval of. Since the first part of Lemma4.1holds for all accumulation point of, one can find such an accumulation pointso that, whereis a closed set with(just asin Lemma4.1), and the contraction ratio ofis an irrational power of.

Now we are able to prove the non-obliqueness theorem for the dependent case.

Letbe as at the beginning of this section. Ifsendsinto itself, thenis not oblique.

By Remark3.3and Proposition2.2, it suffices to consider whenand. Suppose on the contrary thatis oblique. Pickbe as in Lemma4.1withoblique and denote bythe contraction ratio of. If, then it is not hard to see that every horizontal slice ofis a finite set. From the form of(recall (4.5)),is a finite set. But by Proposition2.1and the obliqueness of,is an infinite set. This contradicts.

Now suppose. By Remark4.2, we can find,,and a level-rectanglesuch that

Sinceis a similitude, there is a unit directional vectorsuch that for every,maps the horizontal linetofor some. Together with (4.6), we have

Sinceis oblique,are both nonzero. Without loss of generality, assume that(other cases can be similarly discussed).

Note that for each,can be regarded as a similar copy ofcontracted by, whilecan be regarded as a translated copy of. In particular, one can obtain from (4.7) a similitudewith contraction ratio(which is independent of) such that

Pickso thatand let. Then(recall Section 2.2). By (4.8),. So, where. It might be suitable for us to point out an observation here (which will be of help later but not in this proof): since (4.8) also implies, it follows from Proposition2.6that

Next, since, we have by Corollary2.7two pointssuch that(resp.) are both left (resp. right) isolated points of. Sinceis simply a one-dimensional realization of the inclusion, this in turn gives us two pointsand somesuch that both of the tubesanddo not intersect.
Moreover, writingto be the level-rectangles such thatand, respectively, we have (again by Corollary2.7)for allfor some. See Figure4for an illustration.

Pickwithand. For convenience, letand. Since,,can be written as

for some. Sinceis the maximum,. Since,are on the same slice andfor, we havefor. Similarly, there areandsuch that for all,

Fix a large(will be specified later). Note that

So at least one ofis strictly larger than. Writingand, we have by the obliqueness ofthat. We distinguish four simple cases.

In this case, we have by (4.10) that

Since,and,for all largeand hence

In other words,lies in the tube. But we have seen that this tube does not intersect, which leads to a contradiction.

In this case, we have by (4.10) that

Since,and, we havefor all largeand hence

In other words,lies in the tube. Again, we have seen that this tube does not intersect, which leads to a contradiction.

Applying the argument in Case 1 to (4.11), we have for all largethat

which will lead to a contradiction.

Applying the argument in Case 2 to (4.11), we have for all largethat

which will lead to a contradiction.
∎

Combining with the above non-obliqueness result and Proposition2.6, we can quickly prove Theorem1.5.

By Theorem1.3, it suffices to consider the dependent case. Letbe as at the beginning of this section. Ifsendsinto itself, then the above theorem tells us thatis not oblique. So it is not hard to find some integersuch thatfor some, i.e., the orthogonal part ofis simply the identity matrix.

Note thatsends the-axis to a line with a unit vector. Ifbut, we can apply Lemma4.1toand get (recall the second paragraph in Remark4.2) someof which the contraction ratiois an irrational power of. However, applying the argument in the proof of the above theorem, we still arrive at (4.9) (where now) and hence. This is a contradiction.

If, then every row contains at most one selected rectangle in the initial patter of. In particular,. So there must be a vacant column. On the other hand, sinceandis not contained in any vertical line,. Therefore,is a deleted-digit set with Hausdorff dimension. Noting thatimplies that

Then it follows from Lemma2.5that. This completes the proof.
∎

SECTION: 5.The dependent self-similar case

Finally, we consider the case when, that is,is a generalized Sierpiński carpet. However, there does exist such a self-similar carpet allowing oblique embeddings.

Consider the carpet

See Figure5.
Let, which is the matrix for the reflection with respect to some line of slope. It is easy to check that

Therefore,allows an oblique self-embedding.

In the rest of this section, we only consider rotational self-embeddings ofand hope to obtain some information on the rotation angle. Recall the notation (1.1). The following result is well known (see e.g.[18]).

Ifis not contained in any line, then the convex hull ofis a polygon. Moreover, every vertex of this polygon is the fixed point offor some.

From now on, let us fix a generalized Sierpiński carpetsatisfying the strong separation condition and not supported in any line. Denote bythe convex hull of. By the above lemma,is a polygon with finitely many vertices, say. For, we writeto be the interior angle ofat the vertex, and writeto be the edge ofjoiningand. We claim that everyis not isolated ineven along its adjacent edges.

For, there existssuch thatas.

Fix any. By Lemma5.2, there is somesuch thatis the fixed point of. Then

In particular,must lie onand tends toas.
∎

For each,.

For, we again find by Lemma5.2somesuch thatis the fixed point of. Therefore,. This implies that the angle made by every edgeand the-axis has a rational tangent. It follows directly thatfor all.
∎

A “local openness” result as follows will be of great help.

Let. If, then there is an open setsuch that. Moreover,is a finite collection, whereis the orthogonal part of.

Ifsendsinto itself, then for every, we can findand two squares(of leveland, respectively) such that the following properties hold:

,

eitheror.

Fix. Without loss of generality, assume thatlies in the “left bottom area” of, that is,(other cases can be similarly discussed). Let us pick an integerand a level-squaresuch thatand

The existence ofwill be proved at the end of this proof. As a consequence, there is a smallsuch that

wheredenotes the ball centered atand of radius. Since, there is a level-square(for some large) such that. We claim thatis a vertex of the polygonifis picked large. In particular, there existssuch that, which establishes (1).

To see the claim, note that sinceis the convex hull of,. So ifis large enough, then

Therefore,

So. Since,are both polygons and,must be a vertex of.

If (2) is false, we see by (1) thatmeetsonly at the vertex. So there is another level-squaresuch that. By Corollary5.3, there is a sequencesuch thatas. So. Sincemeetsonly at the vertex,. But recalling that, we have for all largethat. This implies that

which contradicts the strong separation condition.

It remains to prove the existence of. By Lemma5.5, there is someand a level-squaresuch that. Sinceis not contained in any line, we haveand(here we abuse slightly these notations from Section 2.1). Iterating the initial pattern if necessary, we can findsuch that

Also, writeand.

If there is somesuch thatbut, then it suffices to take. If such a digit does not exist, then. If, then, where the upper bound holds becausedoes not contain horizontal segments. So there are at leastlevel-squares in the bottom row and it is not hard to see that at least one of them, say, satisfies that the square of sideleft adjacent tois not selected. Then it suffices to take. Similarly (looking atinstead), it suffices to consider when.

Since,. Sobut. Then it is easy to see that takingwould work.
∎

Ifand, then.

For a proof, see[15].
∎

Letbe as in Theorem1.6and letbe as at the beginning of this section. Ifandis an oblique self-embedding similitude of, then.

By Lemma5.7and the obliqueness of, it suffices to show that. Fix anyand pickaccordingly as in Proposition5.6. Without loss of generality, assume that, which is the first possibility in Proposition5.6(2).

Sinceis parallel toandinvolve no rotations,sends a line parallel toto another line parallel to. Without loss of generality, assume that. Then a simple geometric observation (see Figure6) tells us thatcan be realized as follows: first rotate the line containingto the one containing, and then to the one containingand so on until to. Thus

By Corollary5.4,as desired.
∎

With all these observations in hand, Theorem1.6can be easily proved.

Again, we may assume thatis not supported in any line. By Lemma5.5,. Then the statement follows directly from the corollary. ∎

SECTION: References