SECTION: On the role of the unitary transformations in Bell inequalities
The role of the unitary transformations in the Bell-CHSH inequality is highlighted, in both Quantum Mechanics and relativistic Quantum Field Theory. In the former case, we discuss, through a few examples, how the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality can be encoded into unitary transformations acting on a given reference set of Bell’s observables. In the latter case, the Bell-CHSH inequality for a real massive scalar field in the vacuum state is considered. After introducing suitable bounded Hermitian operators, we show that using unitary transformations can significantly improve our previous numerical algorithm, leading to an increase in the size of the violation.

SECTION: Introduction
The study of Bell inequalities within the contexts of Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Field Theory provides profound insights into the nature of quantum correlations and the interplay between locality, causality, and entanglement. In Quantum Mechanics, Bell inequalities serve as a fundamental test for the nonlocal correlations inherent in entangled states, providing a way to distinguish quantum predictions from those of classical theories rooted in local realism. Extensive theoretical investigations and experimental validations have consistently underscored the nonlocal nature of quantum mechanical systems.Extending the analysis of Bell inequalities to Quantum Field Theory introduces both significant challenges and new perspectives. The combination of Quantum Mechanics and Special Relativity creates a rich and sophisticated framework in which locality and causality form the foundational principles. Here, quantum fields are defined as operator-valued distributions. They interact with a vacuum state whose structure is deeply intricate, as illuminated by the Reeh-Schlieder theorem. This complexity demands the use of advanced mathematical tools, including von Neumann Algebras, the Algebraic Quantum Field Theory and the Tomita-Takesaki modular theory, to rigorously examine entanglement and nonlocality in relativistic quantum systems.In the present work, we aim at pointing out the relevance of the unitary transformations in the study of the violation of a generalization of Bell inequalities, known as the Bell-Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt (Bell-CHSH) inequality. For a quantum bipartite system, the Bell-CHSH inequality reads:

wherestands for the state of the system whose Hilbert space is. As it is customary, the lettersrefer to Alice and Bob.A violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality occurs whenever

where the boundis the so-called Tsirelson’s bound. The Alice’s and Bob’s operators,and, are called Bell’s observables and act onand, respectively. These operators are Hermitian and dichotomic, fulfilling the conditions:

and

The possibility of making use of unitary transformations stems from the observation that the Bell operators are always determined up to unitary transformations, namely

whereandare unitaries acting onand.As one can easily figure out, these unitary operators might introduce new parameters, which can be adjusted so as to improve the size of the violation. As we shall see, this will be the case of the Bell-CHSH inequality for a relativistic scalar quantum field in the vacuum state.The paper is organized as follows. In Section () we discuss the role of the unitaries in Quantum Mechanics by revisiting a few examples, namely: the spinBell’s states, thestates and the squeezed states. Section () is devoted to the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Field Theory. The case of a real massive scalar field inMinkowski spacetime will be scrutinized. After introducing a set of bounded Hermitian operators, the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in the vacuum state is established by making use of the Tomita-Takesaki modular theory. Moreover, we show how the use of unitary transformation improves the size of the violation in our numerical setup. Section () collects our conclusion.

SECTION: Unitary transformations and the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Mechanics
We begin this section by revisiting the textbookexample of the entangled spinsinglet state

which gives maximal violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality:

The Bell operators are given by

where the parametersdenote the so-called Bell angles. The operators in Eq. () fulfill the conditions () and (). A straightforward calculation gives

The usual choice for, corresponding to Eq. (), is

Looking now at the Bell operators,, one recognizes that they can be obtained from a pair of reference Bell operators,, upon acting with unitaries. For example, it turns out that

wherestands for the unitary operator

whileis the Hermitian dichotomic reference operator

In the same vein,

with

This example shows that all parameters, from which the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality originates, can be encoded into unitaries.As a second example, one might consider thestates:

wherecorrespond to the Hilbert spaces of two harmonic oscillators:andwith

Here, the maximal violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality is achieved by taking as Bell’s observables the following expressions

where, as usual,denote the four Bell parameters. The maximal violation follows by noticing that

Moreover, similarly to the case of spin, the operators () can be cast into the form of Eq. (), namely

while, for the reference operator, one gets

Analogous expressions can be written down for. Again, all parametersare encoded into unitaries.As a last example, let us consider the squeezed state

The Bell’s observables are introduced by making use of the isospin operators,by separating the basis statesinto even and odd states:

and by defining

It turns out that

yielding maximal violation forclose to 1.Again

Other examples may be provided, including entangled coherent statesas well as Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger (GHZ) states. The above considerations show the relevant role that unitaries play in the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Mechanics.

SECTION: Facing the Bell-CHSH in Quantum Field Theory
We are now ready to face the more complex case of the relativistic Quantum Field Theory. We shall rely on the seminal works by S. J. Summers and R. Werner, who have established a set of remarkable results concerning the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in the vacuum state, see also the recent review.

SECTION: The real massive scalar field in 1+1 Minkowski spacetime
Let us begin by considering a free massive real scalar field inMinkowski spacetime. In a plane-wave expansion, it reads

where. For the canonical commutation relations, one has

It is a well established fact that quantum fields have to be treated as operator-valued distributions. As a consequence, they have to be smeared out to yield well-defined operators acting on the Hilbert space,

whereis a real smooth test function with compact support. Using the smeared fields, the Lorentz-invariant inner product is introduced by means of the two-point smeared Wightman function

whereandare also real smooth test functions with compact support, andandare the smeared versions of the Pauli-Jordan and Hadamard expressions

Here,andare given by

where

andare Bessel functions, whileis the mass parameter.Both the Hadamard and Pauli-Jordan distributions are Lorentz-invariant. Notably, the Pauli-Jordan distributionencodes relativistic causality, as it vanishes outside the light cone. Furthermore,and the Hadamard distributionexhibit distinct symmetry properties:is odd under the transformation, whereasis even. When expressed in terms of smeared fields, the commutator of the field operators takes the form. Within this context, the conditionwhenever the supports ofandare spacelike separated, encapsulates causality in an elegant way.

SECTION: Basics of the Tomita-Takesaki modular theory
The Tomita-Takesaki modular theory serves as a powerful framework for analyzing the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Field Theory. To set the stage, it is worth briefly reviewing some of the basic features of this elegant theoretical structure.Letstand for an open region of the Minkowski spacetime and letbe the space of test functions with support contained in:

One introduces the symplectic complement ofas

In other words,is given by the set of all test functions for which the smeared Pauli-Jordan expression defined by Eq. () vanishes. The usefulness of the symplectic complementrelies on the fact that it allows us to rephrase causality as

The next step is that of introducing a von Neumann algebraof bounded operators supported in, equipped with a cyclic and separating vector, which will be addressed in the discussion of von Neumann algebras later. As a concrete example of such an algebra, one may consider the von Neumann algebra generated by the Weyl operators, namely

wherestands for the unitary Weyl operatorUsing the relation,
valid for two operatorscommuting with, one finds that the Weyl operators give rise to the following algebraic structure:

whereis the smeared causal Pauli-Jordan expression (). Settingwithbeing the smeared annihilation and creation operators

andbeing the Fourier transformation of the test function, it follows that the vacuum expectation value of the operatorturns out to be

whereand the vacuum stateis defined by. In particular, ifandare spacelike separated, causality ensures that the Pauli-Jordan function vanishes. Thus, from the above properties, it follows the useful relation

A very important property of the von Neumann algebra, Eq. (), generated by the Weyl operators is that, due to the Reeh-Schlieder theorem, the vacuum stateis both cyclic and separating, meaning that:the set of states,arein the Hilbert space;the condition, implies.In such a situation, one can apply the modular theory of Tomita-Takesaki, which will be presented for a generic von Neumann algebrawith a cyclic and separating vector state. To begin, it is helpful to remind the notion ofof the von Neumann algebra, namely

,contains all elements which commute with each element of. Let us also state the so-called Haag’s duality,namely, the commutantcoincides with the elements ofobtained by taking elements belonging to the symplectic complementof. This duality, to our knowledge, has only been proven in the case of free Bose fields.The
Tomita-Takesaki construction makes use of an anti-linear unbounded operatoracting on the von Neumann algebraas

from which it follows thatand. Making use of the polar decomposition

whereis the anti-linear modular conjugation operator andis the self-adjoint and positive modular operator, the following properties holds

We can now state the renowed Tomita-Takesaki theorem, namely:as well as;there is a one-parameter family of operatorswithwhich leaveinvariant, that is:

This theorem has far reaching consequences and finds applications in many areas. As far as the Bell-CHSH inequality is concerned, it provides a powerful way of obtaining Bob’s operators from Alice’s ones by means of the anti-unitary operator. The construction goes as follows: One picks up two test functionsand consider the two Alice’s operators,

Thus, for Bob’s operators, we write

From the Tomita-Takesaki Theorem, it follows that the two set of operatorsandfulfill the necessary requirements, sincebelong to the commutant. Also, it is worth underlining that the action of the operatorsandmay be lifted directly into the space of the test functions, giving rise to an analogue of the Tomita-Takesaki construction, namely,

where the test function. Analogously,

The operatorsare such that

The operatoris anti-unitary, whileis self-adjoint and positive. Moreover, from, one learns that, in the case in which the regionis a wedge region of the Minkowski spacetime, the spectrum of the operatoris the whole positive real line,. This result follows from the analysis of Bisognano-Wichmannof the Tomita-Takesaki modular operator for wedge regions

The wedge regionsare causal complement of each other and are left invariant by Lorentz boosts. In what follows, we shall always consider the regionto be a wedge region. For instance, one may figure out that Alice is located in the right wedge, while Bob is in the left one.The operatorshave the physical meaning of projecting into the spaceand its symplectic complement, namely, one can showthat a test functionbelongs toif and only if

Analogously, a test functionbelongs to the symplectic complementif and only if

These properties enable us to construct a useful set of test functions for Alice and Bob. Following, Alice’s test functionscan be specified as follows: Picking up the spectral subspace ofspecified byand introducing the normalized vectorbelonging to this subspace, one writes

whereare free arbitrary parameters, corresponding to the norms of. According to the setup outlined above, Eq. () ensures thatandMoreover, one checks thatis orthogonal to,. In fact, from

it follows that the modular conjugationexchanges the spectral subspaceinto, ensuring thatandare orthogonal. Concerning now the pair of Bob’s test functions, they are given by. In fact, we have

meaning that, as required by the relativistic causality,belong to the symplectic complement.Finally, taking into account thatbelongs to the spectral subspace, it follows that, in the limit,

SECTION: The violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Field Theory
We have now all tools to discuss the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in Quantum Field Theory. Let us proceed with the choice of the Hermitian bounded operators. For such a purpose, we consider the following expressions

whereandare Alice’s and Bob’s test functions, respectively. It is easily checked that the above operators are Hermitian. By construction,commute with. Moreover, it turns out that these operators are projectors, a feature which follows from the presence of the
vacuum projector. In fact,

For further use, it is helpful to introduce the correlation function for the projectors of Eq. (),

In particular, by making use of Eqs. (), it follows that

so that, for the correlation function () one gets

Remarkably, there is an immediate relationship between projectors and dichotomic operators. Ifis a projector, then the operator

is dichotomic, namely

Therefore, for the Hermitian and dichotomic Bell operators, we have

so that, for the Bell-CHSH correlation function in the vacuum stateone gets

A violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality takes place when

Making use of the projectors, it follows that

This expression yields a maximum violation given by

corresponding to the parameter values

As discussed in the previous Section, we now make use of unitary transformations and introduce new Bell operatorsanddefined by

where,are free arbitrary parameters. By construction, the operatorscommute with.It turns out that the introduction of unitary transformations allows for a more efficient scan of the candidates for the Bell operators associated with the highest violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality. This happens because the unitaries increase the parameter space in a consistent way. The end result is that we are able to achieve an increase in the size of the violation withandas compared with the corresponding violation obtained withand. In fact, a numerical analysis gives us

which is attained for

The effect of the unitary transformations is well captured by Figs. () and (), in which the behaviours of the correlatorsandas a function of the parametersare reported.In Fig. (), one sees the violation of the Bell-CHSH correlatorbefore the use of the unitary transformations. In Fig. (), the effect of the unitaries is exhibited. Here, the blue surface corresponds to the maximum value attained by:. The orange surface yields the behaviour of. One sees that the orange surface overcomes the blue one.

SECTION: Conclusions
In this work, the role of the unitary transformations has been highlighted. Through a few examples, it has been shown that, in Quantum Mechanics, the Bell operators can be cast into the form

wherestands for a reference operator. All parameters leading to the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality can be encoded in the unitary transformation.A similar pattern holds in Quantum Field Theory. Here, as exhibited by Eqs. () and (), the size of the violation is considerably improved by making use of unitary transformations, Eqs. ().Let us add the following remarks:

Looking at Eqs. (), one is led to figure out that a sequence of unitary transformations could be constructed and applied to the starting operatorsand, Eqs. (). At each step, the size of the violation should be improved a little bit. Perhaps, this procedure might give a practical way of achieving a final violation close to Tsirelson’s bound:.

The construction of the bounded Hermitian operators presented in Eqs. () looks rather interesting, being easily generalized to a whole family of operators. Let, in fact,denote a generic, non-Hermitian bounded operator in the smeared field. Then, the quantity

is Hermitian and bounded.

Interestingly enough, the above construction applies to Abelian gauge theories as well. Letbe an Abelian gauge field, subject to the gauge transformation

and letbe the corresponding smeared field

whereare smooth test functions with compact support. Therefore, the operator

is gauge invariant, besides of being bounded and Hermitian. Needless to say, expression () might open the road for investigating the violation of the Bell-CHSH inequality in the vacuum state of Abelian gauge theories.

SECTION: Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Brazilian agencies CNPq, CAPES end FAPERJ for financial support. S.P. Sorella, I. Roditi, and M.S. Guimaraes are CNPq researchers under contracts 301030/2019-7, 311876/2021-8, and 309793/2023-8, respectively. F.M. Guedes acknowledges FAPERJ for financial support under the contract SEI-260003/007871/2024.

SECTION: References