SECTION: Invariant probability measures under-adic transformations
It is well-known that the Lebesgue measure is the unique absolutely continuous invariant probability measure under the-adic transformation. The purpose of this paper is to characterize the family of all invariant probability measures under the-adic transformation and to provide some description of them. In particular, we describe the subfamily of all atomic invariant measures under the-adic transformation as well as the subfamily of all continuous and singular invariant probability measures under the-adic transformation.
Iterative functional equations play the base role in our considerations.

SECTION: Introduction
The dyadic transformation is an example of the simplest deterministic dynamical system that has so-called chaotic dynamics. It is a special case of the so called-transformation, which has been studied by many authors during the last 70 years. The-transformation was introduced in, where it was proved that there exists exactly one probability measure that is absolutely continuous (with respect to the Lebesgue measure) and invariant under the-transformation. An explicit formula for this invariant probability measure was obtained inand, independently, in, where it was also proved that the-transformation is weakly mixing, and hence ergodic. Exactness of the-transformation was demonstrated in.
Additional information on the-transformation with extensive literature and broadly discussed topics connected with it can be found in.

Results about the existence of the unique absolutely continuous invariant probability measure under the-transformation, on its explicit formula and ergodicity behaviour have been motivation for many authors to extend them for more general transformations but still connected with the original-transformations (see e.g.). All the results on the existence of absolutely continuous invariant probability measures are based on a method introduced infor deterministic dynamical systems.
These methods were later effectively extended to random dynamical systems (see e.g.).

In many situations, there are also continuous and singular invariant measures or atomic invariant probability measures among the absolutely continuous invariant probability measures under a given transformation.
Moreover, the family of all invariant probability measures under a given transformation can be quite large, however among them, there exists only one invariant probability measure that is absolutely continuous. An example of such a situation is the-adic transformation, which we will consider in this paper. The problem with determining invariant probability measures under a given transformation that are not absolutely continuous is that there is no method for this purpose. To the best of our knowledge, one can get some information on singular invariant probability measures considering the iterated function system associated with the given transformation (if it is even possible) and to show that its attractor is of Lebesgue measure zero. However, by this way we may obtain only very specific singular invariant probability measures.

The purpose of this paper is to describe the family of all invariant probability measures under the-adic transformation. As we know that the family has exactly one absolutely continuous measure (which is exactly the Lebesgue measure) it suffices to determine its subfamily of all atomic measures and its subfamily of all continuous and singular measures. Let us note that large families of continuous and singular invariant probability measures under the dyadic transformation were determined in.

Our main tool in this paper is the functional equation associated with the probability distribution functions of invariant measures that is slightly different from that which arises considering density functions of invariant measures (see e.g.).

The main part of this paper is, in which we describe the structure of
atomic invariant probability measures under the-adic transformation that are supported on minimal finite orbits. As noted in the introduction ofsuch a description can help in progresses of solving the Furstenberg’sconjecture, posed in, that is one of the major unsolved problems in the field of ergodic theory in dynamical systems.

SECTION: Preliminaries
Denote bythe-algebra of all Borel subsets ofand bythe family of all-measurable maps. Any measure defined onis called aBorel measureand anyis called aBorel transformation.
A Borel probability measureis said to beinvariant underif

Throughout this paper, we fix an integer numberand consider the-adic transformationdefined by

The aim of this paper is to characterize the set of all invariant measures underand provide some description of them. However, we will formulate some results for more general transformations than. For this purpose, we fix numberssuch that. Next, for everywe fix an increasing bijectionand considerdefined by

The definition ofdoes not require defining the functionson the right endpoints of their domains, however it will be important into simplify writing.
Note that in the case whereis the-adic transformation, we haveandfor every.

Denote bythe family of all Borel probability measures and put

We begin with two simple observations on.

Everyvanishes on each point of the set.
In particular, if, thenfor every.

Denote bythe Dirac measure concentrated at the point.

Assume that. Thenif and only if.
In particular,if and only if.

SECTION: Invariant measures vs. functional equations
Put

Recall (cf. e.g.orand note that left- and right-continuous functions correspond to each other) thatandare with one-to-one correspondence by the formula

() Fixand.
Applying, we obtain

() Fixsatisfying. Applying, for every, we get

Hence for allwithwe have

Now, it suffices apply.
∎

In the case of-adic transformationtakes the form

Put

Byeachdetermines exactly oneand eachis determined by some. Therefore, we see that for describing, it suffices to describe. Clearly, anycan be decomposed in a canonical way into the absolutely continuous part, the continuous and singular part, and the jump part, i.e. the function defined byfor every(see, cf.).
Note that by a jump function we understand anyfor which the measurethat corresponds tobyis atomic (or discrete), i.e. there are a countable setand a sequencewithsuch that.

We say that the transformationisnonsingularifis of measure zero wheneveris of measure zero (cf.). Note that each-adic transformation is nonsingular.

Fix. By the canonical decomposition (see, cf.) there exist exactly one (non-decreasing) absolutely continuous function, exactly one (non-decreasing) continuous and singular function, and exactly one (non-decreasing) jump functionsuch thatand

for every.
To see thatis absolutely continuous, one can apply the Banach-Zarecki theorem (seeor).
It is easy to check that the functionis continuously singular andis a jump function. Then from the uniqueness in the canonical decomposition there exists a constantsuch that for everywe have

and sincewe see thatsatisfiesand

Again by the canonical decomposition there exists a constantsuch that for everywe have

and sincewe see thatsatisfiesand

Finally, sincewe conclude that, and hencesatisfies.
∎

Fromwe see that for describing the familyit suffices to describe each of its three subfamilies:

SECTION: The family
Although we know that it is sufficient to describe the families,, and, we will start with a general description of the family.

In this section, the main tool are Banach limits.
Recall that a Banach limitis a linear and continuous extension of the functional, whereis the space of all bounded sequences of real numbers, andis its subspace consisting of all convergent sequences. In other words, a Banach limit is a linear, positive, shift invariant and normalized functional defined on.
The reader interested in Banach limits can consult, e.g.,and the references therein.

From now on, we fix a Banach limit.

Defineputting

Obviously,

With anywe associate the functiondefined by

The functionmay not be left-continuous. Moreover, it can happen that.
Therefore, we define the functionputting

where

Denote bythe characteristic function of the set.

If, then.

If, thenis continuous at.

() Sinceand, we have.
Fix nowand. Repeatedly applying, we get

Hence, which yields.

() Fixand. Then

In consequence,

which jointly withyields.
∎

Before showing howworks in the-adic case, let us note that

and, by induction,

Fixof the form. Bywe have. Fix. Then usingwe obtain

Therefore,and the invariant measure that corresponds tobyis the one-dimensional Lebesgue measure on.

SECTION: The family
It is well-known (see) that

however it can be deduced from the following more general result about the transformationin, which can be stated as follows.

Sinceis the unique absolutely continuous function belonging to the family, in view of, it would be interesting (see) to find the biggest (in the sense of inclusion) subfamily of the familysuch that for any functionfrom this subfamily we have. We do not know what this subfamily is, but we have the following result.

Fix an absolutely continuous functionand letbe the-periodic extension of. According tofor everythe function

belongs to, and moreover,

see e.g..

Fixand.
Applying again,, and the periodicity of, we obtain

This jointly withcompletes the proof.
∎

SECTION: The family
Forwe set. The next remark can be easily verified.

Assume thatand.
Then the functiondefined bysatisfiesand is such thatif and only ifis continuous at.

Note that iffails to be continuous at a point, then there are further points, where it fails to be continuous as well, and the jumps have to add up.
But now, all of these points generate themselves further points of discontinuity.
However, this process cannot continue forever as the sum of all possible jumps is bounded from above by.
Therefore, points have to start to coincide, forcing them to be of a certain form.
This is the motivation behind the definition of the following set:

Fixand.

If, thenis constant on, and hence continuous at. Thus we assume that. We also assume that, otherwise we replacewithgiven by

Here, we gloss over a small technical issue, namely that constant functions differing fromare not contained in.
However,if and only if for all

and thus, we might have to work with this equality instead of.

Put

and note thatasis non-decreasing. For everywe set

We want to show that

for every. For, this is clear by the definition of the number. Fixand assume thatholds. By, we have

It is easy to check thatfor allwith. This jointly withand the fact thatis non-decreasing gives

for every. Thus, and bywe see thatis continuous at.
∎

In principle, ifis not continuous at a point, then there is at least onesuch thatalso fails to be continuous at the point.
It turns out that there is exactly one such.

Fixand assume by contradiction that there existsuch that, i.e. there are,, andsuch thatand.
Then

Since, we conclude that.

To prove the second part of the lemma assume first that. Then there exist,, andsuch that; note thatyieldsor. Then

Conversely, if there existssuch that, then an easy calculation shows that.
∎

The next observation is an obvious consequence of the definition of, the fact that, and, and thus we omit the proof.

Assume that there existswhich is discontinuous at. By, there are uniquely determined sequences(of real numbers from) and(of integer numbers from) such thatfor every.says that the sequenceis periodic, i.e. there existssuch thatandfor all. Letbe the smallest number such that. Then the sethasdistinct points and ifis discontinuous at a point of the set, then it is discontinuous at every point of that set, by the periodicity of. This allows us to decompose the setinto disjoint subsets, where each of these sets is minimal (in the sense of inclusion) with the following two properties:

(the numberwill be called thelevelof, whereas the indexis used to number the sets of level);

Ifis discontinuous at a point of, then it is discontinuous at every point of.

In fact, each of the sets from the decomposition ofis of the form described above. More precisely, fix a sequencesuch thatand choosesatisfying. Then the formulagives raise to the definition of
the cyclewith

and.

Iffor every, then the cycleleads to the setand sinceis a cycle, we have

Assume now that. Thenand, which means thatfor every. Sinceis a cycle, we see thatwith some. Hence

and puttingwe obtain

This leads to the set, and as previously, we have

Summarizing, we see that for eachthe sequencewithleads either to the setor to the setwithandbeing a divisor of.
In particular, we have:

sets of levelof the form

where(cf.);

sets of levelof the form

whereand;

sets of levelof the form

whereandoror;

sets of levelof the form

where

Now, with each of the setwe want to associate a jump function belonging tothat is discontinuous exactly at the points of the set. The first lemma concerns sets of level, and its proof is a simple verification.

The next remark is an immediate consequence of the description of sets; cf..

Let. Then:

there exist uniqueandsuch that;

there exist uniqueandsuch that.

Letand. Then there exists at most onesuch that.

Assume by contradiction thatandwith, then, a contradiction.
∎

Before formulating the second lemma let us recall thatand since, we havefor any, whenever.

It is clear from the definition ofthat it is non-decreasing, left-continuous, and discontinuous only at points of the set.
Moreover,and. So, to complete the proof it suffices to show thatsatisfies, which means that

for every.

It is easy to check thatholds for. Fix. We will consider three cases:

,

for some,

.

Case (a). In this case we have.
For proving thatholds, it suffices to show that for noandwe have

indeed, then for allandwe have

Let us assume by contradiction that there areandsatisfying. Bythere existsandsuch that.
Actually,andare the same:

yielding

and thus.
Then

and hence, a contradiction to the fact thatis minimal.

Case (b). In this case we have.
To prove thatholds, it is enough to show that there are exactlydistinct pointssuch that for eachthere exists only onesatisfying; indeed, then

Assume first thatsatisfieswith some. Note thatis unique by. Fromthere existsandsuch that.
As

the uniqueness just mentioned now guarantees that.

Then, by, we have

and hence. This shows that there exist at mostdistinct points inwith the required property. Fix now. Bythere areandsuch that, and hence

which means thatholds. Therefore, we showed that each of the elements inleads to someandsatisfying.
Actually more is true: theare distinct, and in consequence, the required property holds.

Case (c). In this case.
Let. Fromthere are uniqueandsuch that. Then

and, by, we see that for eachthere is exactly onesatisfying. Therefore, for everywe have

which implies thatholds.
∎

We conclude our investigations with the following result.

Making use ofandit is easy to check that the functiongiven bybelongs to.

Let now. Choosewith. Then there areandsuch that. Byfor everywe have. Moreover,. Therefore, the functionis non-decreasing, continuous at every point of the set, and. If, thenand we are done. If, thenand repeating the same arguments as before we can choose,, andsuch that the functionis non-decreasing, continuous at every point of the set, and. Again, if, thenand we are done. Otherwise we continue the reasoning. Since the set of all discontinuity points ofis countable (see), the proof can be completed by induction.
∎

Fromwe see that there are solutions of equationthat are discontinuous exactly at the points of the set.

SECTION: The family
One can ask if it would be possible to formulate any counterpart offor the family. Unfortunately, we do not know if, for a continuous and singular, the sequenceconverges pointwise, and if so, to which function. We do not even know if, for a continuous (and singular), the functionis continuous (and singular).
So, we cannot determine members of the familyby any formula similar to that in.

Fix. Bywe haveor. If, then applyingtogether withandwe conclude that there are constantsand, for alland, such thatand

All the constants can be easily calculated. Asis differentiable almost everywhere, we have (almost everywhere)

whereas for allandwe have

In consequence, for anysuch thatthe formula

defines a function belonging to. Note thatgives, so the above formula holds asandfor alland.

Let us finish this short section with some information on previous results concerning the family. Namely, in(see also), it was observed thatcontains a large family of strictly increasing and Hölder continuous functions that are convex combinations of the singular de Rham functions from(studied earlier in,, and). Next inmore new families of strictly increasing functions belonging towere found. Among them a family of functions that are not Hölder continuous. Recently, in, it was observed thatalso contains a quite large family of Cantor-type functions. All the results from the mentioned papers concerns the family, however some of them can be generalized to the family.

SECTION: Acknowledgement
The research was supported by the University of Silesia Mathematics Department (Iterative Functional Equations and Real Analysis program).

SECTION: References