SECTION: Enveloping Ellis semigroups as compactifications of transformations groups

The notion of a proper Ellis semigroup compactification is introduced. Ellis’s functional approach shows how to obtain them from totally bounded equiuniformities on a phase spacewhen the acting groupis with the topology of pointwise convergence and the-spaceis-Tychonoff.

The correspondence between proper Ellis semigroup compactifications of a topological group and special totally bounded equiuniformities (called Ellis equiuniformities) on a topological group is established. The Ellis equiuniformity on a topological transformation groupfrom the maximal equiuniformity on a phase spacein the case of its uniformly equicontinuous action is compared with Roelcke uniformity on.

Proper Ellis semigroup compactifications are described for groups(the permutation group of a discrete space) and(automorphism group of an ultrahomogeneous chain) in the permutation topology. It is shown that this approach can be applied to the unitary group of a Hilbert space.

Keywords: semigroup, topological transformation group, enveloping Ellis semigroup, equiuniformity, compactification, ultratransitive action, chain, Hilbert space.

AMS classification: Primary 57S05, 20E22 Secondary 22F05, 22F50, 54E05, 54D35, 54H15, 47B02

SECTION: 1.Introduction and preliminary remarks

Compactifications of topological (semi)groups are a vital tool of investigations in Topological dynamics[46],[19]and Topological Algebra[21]. In the paper by a proper compactification of a topological space, we understand a compactum in whichis a dense subspace. Due to A. Weil a topological groupis a dense subgroup of a compact topological group(is a proper compactification of) iffis totally bounded (in the right uniformity). There are groups without (proper) semitopological semigroup compactifications[32]. Every topological group has a proper right topological semigroup compactification, the greatest ambit[7]. A self-contained treatment of the theory of compact right topological semigroups and, in particular, of semigroup compactifications (nonproper) is in[6]. A study of the proper group’s compactifications can be found in[45].

The functional approach in the study of transformation groups (groups acting effectively on phase spaces) allows us to view elements ofas self maps of the phase space. Eachis an element ofand the composition of maps makes the image ofa semigroup. Moreover, the multiplication onand composition onmakes this representation an isomorphism of semigroups. This approach came from topological dynamics due to Ellis’s construction[13]. R. Ellis examined the subgroupof group of homeomorphismsof compactumas a subsemigroup of the Cartesian product(a right topological semigroup) and named the closure ofintheenveloping(Ellis)semigroup[13]. It is a compact right topological semigroup and is a nonproper semigroup compactification of(is not its topological subspace).

However, ifis in the topology of pointwise convergence (for the action), then Ellis’s representation becomes a topological isomorphism. For the action of a topological group on itself by multiplication on the left the topology of a group is equal to the topology of pointwise convergence (Lemma1.3). If the topology of pointwise convergence on a group is an admissible topology for the actionandis a-Tychonoff space, then the topology of pointwise convergence on a group is an admissible topology for the action ofof any-compactification of(Lemma1.4). These observations allow us to define in §2.1a concept of a proper Ellis semigroup compactification (Definition2.1) and the corresponding Ellis equiuniformity (Definition2.3). The proper Ellis semigroup compactification is a right topological semigroup and is a-compactification of a group(multiplication agrees with the extended action). We demonstrate how to obtain all Ellis equiuniformities from totally bounded equiuniformities on(is examined as a-Tychonoff space) in §2.4(Theorem2.22).

In §3we examine uniformly equicontinuous actions (in this case the topology of pointwise convergence is an admissible group topology on an acting group, and actions by isometries and actions on coset spaces with respect to neutral subgroups (by multiplication on the left) are among them). For actions on coset spaces with respect to a neutral subgroup, the corresponding Ellis equiuniformity is less than or equal to the least Ellis equiuniformity on a group that is greater than or equal to the precompact reflection of the Roelcke uniformity (Theorem3.2).

Examples illustrate what proper Ellis semigroup compactifications can be obtained from the totally bounded maximal equiuniformities on phase spaces.

In §3.1.1we examine an example of an ultratransitive action of a groupon a discrete space. It is shown that the Roelcke compactification ofis equal to the proper Ellis semigroup compactification obtained from the maximal equiuniformity onand is a semitopological semigroup. The maximal equiuniformity in this case is the least totally bounded uniformity on(and corresponds to the Alexandroff compactification of).
The Roelcke compactification ofis described (Theorem3.4and Corollary3.8). Houghton’s groups serve as an example. In[18, § 12, Theorem 12.2]the description of the Roelcke compactification of the permutation group of natural numbers is given. It is also shown that it is a semitopological group homeomorphic to the Cantor set.

In §3.1.2we examine an ultratransitive action of a subgroupof automorphism groupon a chainin discrete topology. We establish that the Roelcke compactification ofis a proper Ellis semigroup compactification iff a chain is continuous (Corollaries3.13and3.17). In the general case, we derive the least Ellis equiuniformity which is greater than or equal to the Roelcke uniformity, from the Roelcke uniformity using Ellis construction (Theorem3.11and Corollary3.17). The proper Ellis semigroup compactification and the Roelcke compactification ofare described in Theorem3.11. The maximal equiuniformity onfrom which the Ellis equiuniformity is obtained corresponds to the maximal-compactification ofwhich is also described in §3.1.2. It is the minimal linearly ordered compactification of a GO-space.
Thompson groupin the permutation topology is examined in Example3.18.is Roelcke precompact but its Roelcke compactification is not a proper Ellis semigroup compactification.

In §3.2it is shown that the Roelcke uniformity on the unitary group of a Hilbert space coincides with the uniformity from the family of the stabilizers of points of the unit sphere and is an Ellis equiuniformity (Theorem3.23). The result provides an alternative proof that the Roelcke compactification of the unitary group is a semitopological group which coincides with the space of all linear operators of normin the weak operator topology[44].

The method for working with Ellis equiuniformities is detailed in §2.2and2.3. In Theorem2.7we present both the topological and uniform variants of Ellis’s construction and establish the extremal property of Ellis uniformity. Proposition2.14outlines a condition for the coincidence of the Ellis equiuniformity corresponding to the extended action and equiuniformity correponding to the original one. We demonstrate that the map of the poset of equiuniformities on the phase space to the poset of Ellis equiuniformities preserves order. In Proposition2.16we establish a condition when the Ellis equiuniformity is equal to the uniformity on a group from a family of small subgroups. Lastly, in Proposition2.21we establish the connection between Ellis equiuniformities for the actions on different phase spaces.

The paper is a continuation of investigations initiated in[41].

We adopt terminology and notation from[14]and[37]. The family of finite subsets of a set (or space)is denotedand directed by inclusion. The set of non-negative reals is represented by.

All spaces considered are Tychonoff, and we denote a (topological) space aswhereis a topology on (a set). We order topologies:if. An abbreviation “nbd” refers to an open neighborhood of a point. The family of all nbds of the identity elementinis denoted. A proper compactification ofis denotedwhereis compacta,is a dense embedding.

Uniform space is denoted as,is a cover andis a corresponding entourage of. If the coveris a refinement of, we use the notation. Uniformity on a topological space is compatible with its topology. Additionally,denotes the completion of.

SECTION: 1.1.Semigroups

Asemigroupis a setwith an associative internal binary operation (multiplication). A groupwith multiplicationis a semigroup with multiplication. A mapof semigroups is ahomomorphismiffor all. Ifis a homomorphism, thenis a group and a subsemigroup of.

Asemitopological(right topological)semigroupis a semigroupon a topological spacewith separately continuous multiplication(multiplicationcontinuous on the right).

All the necessary (and additional) information can be found in[6]and[3].

SECTION: 1.2.Spaces of maps and semigroup structure on

1. Since the Cartesian productmay be regarded as the set of maps ofinto(), a semigroup structure (multiplication is compositionof maps) may be introduced on.

Ifis a topological space, then the multiplication onin the Tychonoff topology (,,open subset of) is continuous on the right (, if, then) and continuous on the left for continuous maps (,, if, then). Thus,is aright topological semigroup.

Ifis a uniform space, then the uniformityonis the Cartesian product of uniformitieson factors (see[14, Ch. 8, § 8.2]). The multiplication onis uniformly continuous on the right (, ifand, then) and uniformly continuous on the left for uniformly continuous maps (,is uniformly continuous; forletbe such that if, then; thus if, then).

The topology oninduced byis the Tychonoff topology of the product where every factor has the Tychonoff topology induced by. Following[9, Ch.10 , § 1]the uniformityon(as the set of maps) is calledthe uniformity of pointwise(orsimple)convergence(abbreviation u.p.c) and the induced topology isthe topology of pointwise convergence(abbreviation t.p.c.)[14, Ch. 2, § 2.6].

2. Ifis a uniform space, then, following[9, Ch.10 , § 1](see, also[14, Ch. 8, § 8.2]), theuniformity of uniform convergenceon(abbreviation u.u.c.) is defined. The topologyoninduced byis thetopology of uniform convergence(abbreviation t.u.c.). Evidently,and.

SECTION: 1.3.-spaces, admissible topologies on a transformation group and the topology of pointwise convergence

1. An action(designation) of a groupon a set(phase space) is calledeffectiveif thekernel of the actionis the unit of. Ifeffectively acts on, then, whereis thepermutation groupof.

The subgroupofis astabilizer(or stabilizer of points from).

If,, then. For,, is anorbit map.

2. Under a continuous actionof a topological groupon a space, the tripleis called a-space. A continuous actionwill be denotedif we don’t need the special designation for the map.-spacesandareequivalentif there exists a homeomorphismsuch that. Equivalent-spaces are identified.

A uniformityonis called anequiuniformity[29]if the action ofissaturated(any homeomorphism fromis uniformly continuous) and isbounded(for anythere areandsuch that the cover). In this casea-Tychonoff space, the action is extended to the continuous actionon the completionof. The extensionoftois an equiuniformity on.

The embeddingis a-mapor anequivariant mapof-spaces, i.e. that the following diagram

is commutative, the pairis a-extension ofandis a denseinvariantsubset of[31].-spaces as extensions will also be denoted as.

Ifis a totally bounded equiuniformity on, thenis a-compactificationor anequivariant compactificationof. Ifis a-Tychonoff space, then the maximal (totally bounded) equiuniformity onexists andthe maximal-compactificationofcorresponds to the maximal totally bounded equiuniformity on. The maximal totally bounded equiuniformityonis theprecompact reflection[23]of the maximal equiuniformityonand the compactificationis theSamuel compactification ofwith respect to the equiuniformity(see[14, Ch. 8, Problem 8.5.7]).

If for an action(not continuous) of a topological groupon a spacethe uniformityonis saturated and bounded, then the the actionis continuous.

The maximal equiuniformity on a coset spaceof a topological group(action by multiplication on the left) is described in[11]and[25]. There such actions are called open and the covers of the base of the maximal equiuniformity are of the form

Denote bythe set of totally bounded equiuniformities on. All the necessary (and additional) information can be found in[31].

3. Ifis a topological space,is the group of its homeomorphisms, then a groupeffectively acts onif. Ifis a discrete space, then.

A topology in which a groupis a topological group and its effective actionis continuous is called anadmissible group topology on[1].

For an effective action ofon a compactumthecompact-open topologyis the smallest admissible group topology on[1]. Considering elements ofas continuous maps ofinto() the compact-open topologycoincides with the t.u.c.[14, Corollary 8.2.7].

For an effective action ofon a discrete space, thepermutation topology(the subbase is formed by the sets,) is the smallest admissible group topology. The groupin the permutation topology isnon-Archimedean(a unit nbd base is formed by clopen subgroups (stabilizers)) and the-spaceis-Tychonoff.

If thetopology of pointwise convergence(the subbase is formed by sets of the form,,is open in) is an admissible group topology on a groupof homeomorphisms of the spaceacting effectively, then it is the smallest admissible group topology[26, Lemma 3.1],,is an admissible group topology and, ifis a discrete space. Considering elements ofas continuous maps ofinto() the topology of pointwise convergencecoincides with the t.p.c. from §1.2[14, Proposition 2.6.3].

If the topology of pointwise convergenceis an admissible group topology onacting effectively on a compactum, then.

Example from[30]shows that the t.p.c.may be an admissible group topology on a groupof homeomorphisms ofacting effectively, but the-spacemay not be-Tychonoff.

In the paper, effective actions are examined.

4. Letbe a topological group. The-spacewith the actionby multiplicationon the left is-Tychonoff.

Letbe a topological group. For the-spacethe t.p.c.is an admissible group topology onand.

The topologyof pointwise convergence is an admissible group topology since the action is uniformly equicontinuous with respect to the left uniformityon[9, Ch. X, § 3, item 5]and. If, then the setand. Thus,.
∎

Letbe-Tychonoff andis an equiuniformity on. Then the t.p.c.onfor the extended action(is the completion of)is the smallest admissible group topology onand.

Letbe the precompact reflection of,is the Samuel compactification ofandis the-compactification of. From the correctly defined commutative diagram

where all maps are equivariant embeddings andis the extension of a uniformly continuous map(see[14, Ch. 8, Problem 8.5.7]), it follows thatandare invariant subsets of.

The compact-open topologyoninduced by the extended actionis the smallest admissible group topology onandis an admissible group topology on. Hence,. Evidently,, whereis the t.p.c. onfor the action(not necessarily an admissible group topology).

Sinceandare invariant subsets of, for the t.p.c.onfor the action(not necessarily an admissible group topology) one has. Therefore,andis the smallest admissible group topology for the extended action.
∎

SECTION: 1.4.Uniformities on a topological group

On a topological groupfour uniformities are well-known. Theright uniformity(the base is formed by the covers,), theleft uniformity, thetwo sided uniformity(the least upper bound of the right and left uniformities) and theRoelcke uniformity(the greatest lower bound of the right and left uniformities) (the base is formed by the covers,). A groupisRoelcke precompactif the Roelcke uniformity is totally bounded.

For every equiuniformityonof a-spaceone has,is an equiuniformity. All the necessary information about these uniformities can be found in[37].

Uniformity onfrom a family of small subgroups is introduced in[26, § 4].Letbe a-space.
The family of stabilizers

is adirected family of small(closed)subgroups of() which defines the uniformityon. The base ofis formed by the covers

Uniformityis an equiuniformity (for the action) and has a spectral representation. It is initial[37, Proposition-definition 0.16]with respect to the quotient maps(cosetswith the maximal equiuniformities(the quotient uniformities of the right uniformityon)[37, Theorem 5.21]and[11]),.

The completion ofwith respect tois uniformly equivalent to the limit of the inverse spectrum, whereis the completion ofwith respect to,is the extension of the quotient map,[26, Theorem 1.4].

[26, Corollary 4.5], hence, if the uniformityis totally bounded, thenis Roelcke precompact.

For a group(acting on a discrete space) in the permutation topology the stabilizers,, are clopen subgroups (nbds of the unit) and.

SECTION: 2.Ellis uniformity on a group from an equiuniformity on a phase space

SECTION: 2.1.A proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of a topological group

Letbe a topological group. A proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification ofis a pair, whereis a compact right topological semigroup,is a topological isomorphism ofon a dense subgroup ofand the restriction of the multiplication tois continuous.

is the set of proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactifications of.

( a) If a topological groupis a subsemigroup of a compact semitopological semigroup, then the restriction of the multiplication tois necessarily continuous[28, Proposition 6.2], but there are topological groups which have no proper semitopological semigroup compactifications[32].

(b) If in the Definition2.1the requirement onis relaxed to be a continuous homomorphism, then one gets the notion of anenveloping semigroup ofin[46, § 3.6].

(b’) If in the Definition2.1is a semigroup and a topological space, the requirement onis relaxed to be a continuous homomorphism and the condition of continuity of the restriction of the multiplication tois relaxed to its continuity on the left, then one gets the notion of asemigroup compactificationin[21].

(c)with the order:if there is a continuous homomorphismsuch that, is a poset. Below it will be shown that the posetis nonempty.

Let. The restriction of the multiplication todefines a continuous action() and the diagram

is commutative.

The unique uniformityoninduces a totally bounded equiuniformityon, the completion ofis. Denote bythe set of totally bounded equiuniformities ona phase space of.

A totally bounded equiuniformityonis an Ellis equiniformity ifis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of(is the completion of).

is a poset of Ellis equiniformities on.

Not every-compactificationofis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of(equivalently, not every equiniformity onis an Ellis equiniformity).

The posetsandare isomorphic.

The restriction of isomorphism of posets of compactifications ofand totally bounded uniformities on[14, Ch.8, § 8.4]to the proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactifications ofand the Ellis equiniformities onwill work if one shows that a continuous mapof the proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactificationsofsuch thatis a homomorphism.

We must check fulfillment of the equality

From commutativity of the diagram

whereare topological isomorphisms, forone has

and (e1) holds for.

The restrictions of the maps

on the subsetare continuous. Hence, (e1) holds for(since continuous maps coincid on a dense subset).

Sinceis a right topological semigroup, for any fixedthe restrictions of the mapsandtoare continuous and coincide on a dense subset. Hence, (e1) holds on,. Thus (e1) holds on.
∎

SECTION: 2.2.Diagonal action, agreement of algebraic structures with topology

(A) For a family of setswith actionsof a group,, thediagonal actionofon the product

where(note, that)
is correctly defined (see, for example,[46, § 2.7 Constructions, 2]).

(1)For an actionthe map

is an isomorphism ofonto the groupwhich is a subsemigroup of.

(2).

(3)The following diagram is commutative(is a-map(not continuous))

(1) Since the action is effectiveis injective.

Thus,and onthe stucture of a group (with multiplication) is correctly defined which is a subsemigroup of(see §1.1and1.2).

(2) Let,.

Thus,.

(3)

∎

It is easy to check that ifis a-space (-Tychonoff andis the correspondent equiuniformity on),, thenis a-space (-Tychonoff and the Cartesian productof equiuniformities,, is an equiuniformity on).

I.Letbe a-space. Then

(1)is a right topological semigroup(besides, multiplication on the left is continuous for),

(2)is a topological isomorphism ofonto the topological groupwhich is a subsemigroup ofand the restriction of multiplicationtois continuous(besides, the multiplication on the left is continuous for,),

(3)is a continuous-map,

(4)the closureis an invariant subset of(and, hence,is a-space)and a subsemigroup of. The restriction of multiplicationtois continuous(besides, the multiplication on the left is continuous for,).

II.Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is an equiuniformity onandis the completion of. Then

(a)is an equiuniformity on, the completion ofis the closure ofin,

(b)for the-Tychonoff spaceis an equiuniformity on, the completion ofis the closure ofin,

(c).

III.Letbe a-Tychonoff space,andis the completion of. Then

(a’), the completion of(the compactification of)is the closure ofin,

(b’)for the-Tychonoff space, the completion of(the proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of)is the closure ofin(),

(c’),.

IV.Equiuniformity(respectively,)is the least uniformityonsuch that the orbit maps,(respectively,,)are uniformly continuous. Hence,(respectively,)is the initial uniformity with respect to the correspondent family of maps.

I. (1) is shown in §1.2.

(2) From §1.3and Proposition2.6one has thatis a topological isomorphism ofonto the subsemigroup of. The diagram

is commutative by item (2) of Proposition2.6andis a homeomorphism. Continuity ofyeilds continuity of. (Continuity of the diagonal actionis equivalent to continuity of the multiplication.)

(3) follows from item (3) of Proposition2.6.

(4) Since the diagonal actionis continuous andis an invariant subset ofthe closureis an invariant subset ofand, hence, by Proposition2.6,

Since,, andis a right topological semigroup,,. Hence,

The second statement follows from item (2).

II. (a), (a’). The restrictionof the equiuniformityon the invariant subsetis an equiuniformity on. If, thenand its restrictionare totally bounded. The equivalence of-spacesandand the fact that the completions of uniform subspaces are their closures in the completions of the correspondent uniform spaces finishes the proof.

The proofs of II (b) and (b’) are the same as of II (a) and (a’), taking into consideration thatandare complete spaces, semigroups and by I (4) the closures ofare invariant subsets.

III (c) follows from the uniform continuity of the projection ofonto, thatis a uniform subspace ofand commutativity of the diagram

III (c’) is proved in similarly. The inclusionyields the map of the corresponding compactifications.

IV. For arbitraryandtake. If, thenandis uniformly continuous. The same argument works in the case of the completion. Thus,(respectively) is an equiuniformity on.

Ifis an uniformity onand the orbit maps,, are uniformly continuous, then the mapis uniformly continuous. Thus,. The same argument works in the case of the completion.
∎

(B) Letbe a-space,is the quotient map,.

The following diagram (the maps are continuous) is commutative for any

where,(is correctly defined since if,, then). Considering all spaces as-spaces (with the action ofonandby multiplication on the left and the diagonal actions (from the action) on products) the maps in the diagramare-maps.

Ifis a-Tychonoff space andis an equiuniformity on, then the uniformityonhas a spectral representation. It is initial with respect to the restrictions toof the projections(productswith the Cartesian product of equiuniformities).

is uniformly equivalent to theinverse limitof the inverse spectrum(the proof is standard and the case of homeomorphism is in[14, Example 2.5.3]). Therefore, the completion ofis uniformly equivalent to the limit of the inverse spectrum, whereis the completion of,is the extension of the restriction toof the projection,.

The maximal equiuniformityonis the quotient of the right uniformityon(follows from[37]and[11]).

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is an equiuniformity on. Then for anythe mapis a uniformly continuous bijection. Hence,

Immediately follows from the commutativity of the diagram, the condition that the restrictionis an equiuniformity which is the restriction of the quotient uniformity ofand that the maximal equiuniformity onis the quotient of the right uniformityon.

Sinceis initial with respect to the quotient maps, see §1.4, andis initial with respect to the restrictions toof the projectionsone has.
∎

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is an equiuniformity on. If the uniformities onwhich are initial with respect to the quotient maps,, and the mapscorrespondently, coincide(in particular, for anythe mapis a uniform equivalence), then

(a),

(b)for any(in particular, the maximal equiuniformity on)(in particular, the map,, is a uniform equivalence).

Since the quotient mapsare open, if the condition of Corollary2.9is valid, then the restrictions of projections,, are open.

(C) Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is an equiuniformity on,is u.u.c. andis the induced t.u.c. on. Evidently,and.

It is easy to check that the diagonal actionis continuous,is an equiuniformity on. Its restrictionon the invariant subsetis an equiuniformity onand the induced topologyis the t.u.c.

Letbe a-Tychonoff space. For every equiuniformityon

If, then.

The restriction of the diagonal action on the invariant subsetis continuous. Identificingby Proposition2.6one has that the actionofonis comtinuous. Hence,.

Since, if, then.
∎

The u.u.c.is a right uniformityon[37]. The base ofis formed by internals of the sets

, since,, iff,.

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is an equiuniformity on. Then for anyand anythere existandsuch that

SECTION: 2.3.Ellis equiuniformity on a group from an equiuniformity on a phase space

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,is a poset of totally bounded equiuniformities on.

For anyby Theorem2.7item III (a’)and item III (b’)are defined. Thus, the maps

are defined. The completion ofis, whereis the proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification.

Letbe a-Tychonoff space. For any.

Letbe the completion of.iff

The mapsandpreserve partial orders.

by item III (c’) of Theorem2.7.

Conditionis a reformulation of the fact that the restriction of projectionontois a uniform equivalence.

Let. For the-compatificationsandof(completions ofandrespectively) let a-mapbe such that(the map of-compactifications). The restrictionis uniformly continuous.

The Cartesian productof mapsof compacta is uniformly continuous. Hence, the restrictionis uniformly continuous and.

Letandbe the extensions of,is any subset the restricition ofto which is a bijection. The Cartesian productof mapsis a-map. The projectionis a-map, the map,, where,(identification of coordinates) is also a-map. Their compositionis a-map.

The following diagram

is commutative. In fact, for any

since

sinceis a-map

Thus,,. Being continuous they coincide onand.

Continuity of, commutativity of the above diagram and compactness (by Theorem2.7) of,yields that the restrictionis the map of-compactifications. From the proof of Proposition2.5one has. It remains to apply Proposition2.5to obtain.
∎

The mapof proper Ellis semigroup compactifications in Proposition2.14doesn’t depend on the choice ofin Proposition2.14.

In general, the mapsandare neither injective, no surjective.

Ifis compact, thenfor the unique uniformityon.

([41, Theorem 2.1],[40, Theorem 1])Letbe a-Tychonoff space and.

If for anyand for any entouragethere is an entouragesuch that the condition is met:

where.
Then.

By Corollary2.9it is sufficient to show that for anythe mapis a uniform equivalence.
Sinceby Lemma2.8, only the uniform continuity ofmust be checked, i.e.
in the cover

the cover

is refined for some.

By the conditionforandthere existssuch that if for,, then there existssuch that. Then for any fixedand any

Therefore,, i.e. the coverand, hence, taking in account item (C) of §2.2,is a uniform equivalence.
∎

The conditionin Proposition2.16is equivalent to the condition,.

Indeed,.

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,andis the completion of(-compactification of). Then

(respectively,)if the correspondent conditionis valid.

If the conditionis valid for, then the conditionis valid for.

From Corollary2.9it also follows that if the conditionholds for, then it holds for the maximal equiuniformity on.

(1) The above approach of obtaining compactifications of transformation groups is used in[40]for the group of homeomorphisms of the compactumin the topology of pointwise convergence.

(2) Fulfillment of the conditionin Proposition2.16yields Roelcke precompactness of an acting group (in the topology of pointwise convergence) by Remark1.5.

Other results that guarantee the Roelcke precompactness of an acting group are the following.

(a) If a (closed) subgroupof a topological groupis Roelcke precompact and the maximal equiuniformity on the coset space(with the action ofby multiplication on the right) is totally bounded, thenis Roelcke precompact[20, Proposition 6.4](can be considered as a transformation group of).

(b) If a topological grouphas a directed familyof small subgroups such that the maximal equiuniformity on a coset space(with the action ofby multiplication on the right) is totally bounded,, thenis Roelcke precompact[26, Corollary 4.5].

(c) If the action, whereis a discrete space, is oligomorphic, thenis Roelcke precompact[43](equivalently, for the action ofin the permutation topology (which coincides with the topology of pointwise convergence) the maximal equiuniformity onis totally bounded[41, Theorem 3.3]).

Letandbe-Tychonoff spaces,andis the completion of(-compactification of),andis the completion of(-compactification of),is a uniformly continuous-map,is dense in. Then

Ifis a surjection, then

Letbe the extension (surjection) of(a uniformly continuous surjective-map). For anyandthe following is valid.

By Theorem2.7item IVus the least equiuniformityonsuch that the orbit maps,, are uniformly continuous. Hence, the orbit maps,, are uniformly continuous. Again appling Theorem2.7item IV, one obtains.

Sinceis a-map(if, then). The usage of definitions ofandfinishes the proof of the inclusion.

The proof of the second statement is analogous.
∎

SECTION: 2.4.The mapsand

For a-Tychonoff spacethe t.p.c.coincides with the topology ofby Lemma1.3and, hence, from the considerations in §2.3the maps,are correctly defined.

For a topological groupandthe following hold.

.

iff for anythe orbit map,, is uniformly continuous(in particular,).

If, then(in particular, if, then).

If, then(in particular,is a surjection,andiff).

iff for any(is the completion of)the orbit map,, is uniformly continuous.

If, then(in particular, if, thenand).

(a) The projectionis uniformly continuous. Therefore,is uniformly continious. Hence,. The inclusionis proved in Proposition2.14.

(b) follows from the inclusionin (a) and Theorem2.7item IV.

(c) The preservation of order follows from Proposition2.14. The rest follows from the inclusionand Theorem2.7item IV.

(d) By (a).

Letbe the-compactification of(is the completion of),,, is the extension of action.

Sinceis a right topological semigroup and the restriction of multiplication onis continuous:

the continuous multiplication on the right is uniformly continuous.
Therefore, for anyand for anythere existssuch that

Therefore, for any entorage, where,, from the subbase ofthere existssuch that

and the mapis uniformly continuous. Hence,and, finally.

The inclusionyields thatis surjective. Idempotentness ofis evident.

(e)for any(is the completion of) the orbit map,, is uniformly continuous.

(f) The first statement follows from Proposition2.14. If, then

and. Appling (a) the last statement is obtained.
∎

1.The greatest ambit ofis the pairwhereis the completion ofwith respect to the maximal totally bounded equiuniformityon[7].

, the greatest ambitis the maximal proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of.

Indeed,by Theorem2.22and the maximality of. Hence,.

If, thenis a precompact group (see, for example,[3, § 3.7]) and the unique (see, for example,[25]) proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification ofis a topological group.

For a non-Archimedian groupthe spectral description ofis given in[36, Corollary 3.3].

2. Letbe the precompact reflection of the Roelcke uniformity..

Indeed, for any cover,, and anythere existssuch that. Hence, the orbit map,is uniformly continuous (). Therefore, for the precompact reflectionofthe orbit map,is uniformly continuous

Sinceis an equiuniformity for both actions: multiplication on the left and the right, its precomact reflectionis a totally bounded equiuniformity for the multiplication on the left and the right. Hence, the actions,and,extend to the continuous actions on the completion of.

Since the inversion,is a uniform equivalence with respect to, it is a uniform equivalence with respect toand, hence, extends to the uniform equivalence of the completion of.

From Theorem2.22one hasiff.

3. Ifis a locally compact group then, the least totally bounded uniformityonis an Ellis equiniformity and the one-point Alexandroff compactificationis a proper semitopological semigroup compactification of[5].

The actionextends to a continuous action. By Theorem2.22item (e) if for anythe map,, is uniformly continuous, thenand.

If, then the extension,, of the mapis a continuous map and, hence, uniformly continuous. Therefore its restriction tois uniformly continuous.

If, then, the mapis constant and, hence, uniformly continuous.

The extensionofis a topological isomorphism of semigroups and,. Hence,is a continuous map, the multiplication on the left inis continuous, andis a proper semitopological semigroup compactification of.

From Proposition2.21, Theorem2.7item IV and Theorem2.22item (a) one has.

Letbe a-Tychonoff space,andis the completion of(-compactification of),andis the completion of,is a uniformly continuous-map,,is dense infor some. Then.

Ifis a surjection, then.

SECTION: 3.The mapsandfor a uniformly equicontinuous action

An actionisuniformly equicontinuousifis a uniformly equicontinuous family of maps on. Equivalently, for anythere existssuch that, for any.
If an actionis uniformly equicontinuous, then the t.p.c.is the smallest admissible group topology on[26, Lemma 3.1]. Moreover,is a-Tychonoff space[29].

Letbe a-space. Ifis a compactum and the actionis (uniformly) equicontinuous, then the completion ofis a compact topological group[46, Theorem 4.2](see, also[9, Ch.10, § 3]and[26, Theorem 3.33]).

Letbe aneutralsubgroup of a topological group(see,[37, Definition 5.29]) without invariant subgroups. Thenis a transitive uniformly equicontinuous group of homeomorphisms of, whereis the quotient uniformity onof the left uniformityon(the final uniformity with respect to the map). By[37, Theorem 5.28]is a neutral subgroup ofandis a-Tychonoff space (withopen action)[26, Proposition 3.2].

Letbe a neutral subgroup without invariant subgroups of a topological group,is the maximal equiuniformity onfor the action. If, then

(2), whereis the precompact reflection of,

(3)ifand, then,

(4)if the conditionis valid for, then the conditionis valid forand,,.

(1) The inclusions,andfollow from Corollary2.18. The inclusionfollows from Remark1.5.

By Proposition 3.25[26], whereis the quotient uniformity ofonfor the quotient map(is the quotient uniformity of the right uniformityon).

The inclusionfollows from the uniform continuity of the surjective orbit maps,by Corollary2.24.

(2) The surjective-mapis uniformly continuous. Since, for the precompact reflectionofthe mapis uniformly continuous. By Proposition2.21.

(3). From the inclusions(items (2)) by items (d) and (f) of Theorem2.22, since.

(4) If the conditionis valid for, then the conditionis valid forby Corollary2.18item (3). The rest follows from items (1), (3), and Proposition2.16.
∎

SECTION: 3.1.The mapsandfor an action on a discrete space

Letbe a subgroup of the permutation groupof a discrete (infinite) space. A discrete spacecan be considered as a metric space with distancebetween distinct points. Thenis an isometry group andis its subgroup. The permutation topologyonis the smallest admissible group topology (and coincides with the topology of pointwise convergence) for the action. The base of the nbds of the unit ofis formed by clopen subgroups

andis non-Archimedean.

Letbe discrete,is a subgroup of. Then for

The base of the Roelcke uniformityonis formed by the covers

which form the base of the uniformitydefined by the family of stabilizers,(see §1.4). Hence,.
∎

Letbe a discrete space andis the maximal equiuniformity onfor the action. Then

and, whereis the completion of,is the Alexandroff one-point compactification of,

all inclusions inTheorem3.2item(1)are equalities and(hence,is Roelcke precompact and the Roelcke compactificationofis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification),

is the set of selfmapsofin the t.p.c. such that,is a bijection onand, whereis an arbitrary subset of,

is a semitopological semigroup.

(a) The base of the maximal equiuniformityonis formed by the covers

see, for example,[11]. Sinceifandifthey are of the form

and coincides with the restriction onof the unique uniformity on. Henceand the maximal equiuniformityonis totally bounded and unique.

(b) From Lemma3.3. Sincefor the extended action(continuity of eachyields that),. Since,, the restriction toof the projectionis a topological isomorphism and.

To end the proof of (b) it is enough to check the inclusion. In the case of the equiuniformity(after identification of coinciding sets, the covers from the base consist of pairwise disjoint sets) the conditionin Proposition2.16can be reformulated in the following form in terms of covers,

For anysuch that,, we consider, without loss of generality, the following.

Put. Then,. If, then,for.

If, thenand,.

If, then there existssuch that the points, where, are mapped respectively to the points(for fixed orders onand).and.
Hence,. Consequently(equivalently) and there issuch that. The inclusionand, hence, the equalityare proved.

(c) At first, let us note that for anythere are no pointssuch that. Indeed, suppose that there aresuch that. One can take the nbdof. Thenand.

Secondly,for any. Indeed, if, then take the nbdofandsincefor any.

It remains to check thatif,is a bijection onand, whereis an arbitraty subset of. Any nbd ofis of the form,, whereif, and,, if. By finitness ofand,there issuch thatifand, and, ifand. Evidently,and.

(d) From (b)is a right topological semigroup, whereis a topological isomorphism ofinto, see §2.2. If one shows that all elements ofare continuous (as selfmaps of), then multiplication on the left is continuous. In order to check the continuity ofit is sufficient to check the continuity ofat the point.

Suppose thatis not continuous at the point. Then there exists a nbdoffor somesuch that the setis infinite. Sinceis finite, there existsuch that. Therefore,. The obtained contradiction shows that allare continuous andis a semitopological semigroup.
∎

(1)is the set of mapsin the t.p.c. such thatis a bijection onand, whereis an arbitrary subset of.

(2) In[18, § 12, Theorem 12.2]the description ofis given. It is also shown thatis a semitopological group homeomorphic to the Cantor set.

An action of a groupon a setis strongly-transitive,, if for any families of distinctpointsandthere existssuch that,.

An action, which is strongly-transitive for all, is called ultratransitive.

(1) A groupwhich acts ultransitively onis a dense subgroup of.

Indeed, let a setbe open inand. Then there aresuch thatandis an open neighbourhood of. Sinceacts ultransitively on, there issuch that,. Evidently,.

(2) The subgroupof the groupwhose elements has finite supports acts ultratransitively on. Hence,is a dense subgroup of. The group whose elements have finite supports is a subgroup of any Houghton’s group (see, for example,[12]). Hence, Houghton’s groups act ultratransitively on the corresponding countable discrete spaces.

(3) Any groupwhich acts ultransitively onisoligomorphicand, hence, Roelcke precompact (see,[43],[41]). The Roelcke precompactness ofis proved in[16](see also[37, Example 9.14]),
the Roelcke precompactness ofis proved in[4].

From (1) it follows that the Roelcke compactification of a groupwhich acts ultransitively onis isomorphic to the Roelcke compactification of.

(4) A spaceisultrahomogeneousif the action of its homeomorphism groupis ultratransitive. Locally compact metrizable CDH spaces whose complement to any finite subset is connected are ultrahomogeneous spaces. They include the spheresin Euclidean spaces,, the Hilbert cube(see, for example,[2]).

The group of homeomorphisms of an ultrahomogeneous space with the permutation topology is Roelcke precompact, although the permutation topology is not necessarily admissible. The homeomorphism groups of the spheres,, and the Hilbert cubein the compact open topology (the smallest admissible group topology) are not Roelcke precompact[38]. Hence, in any admissible group topology, these groups are not Roelcke precompact.

Letacts ultransitively on a discrete space. Then for the actionitems(a)and(b)ofTheorem3.4hold andandare topologically isomorphic semitopological semigroups.

The same reasonings as in the proof of Theorem3.4work in the case of ultratransitive action to prove analogs of items (a) and (b).

is a dense subgroup ofby item (1) of Remark3.7and is Roelcke precompact[37, Proposition 3.24]. Moreover, these Roelcke compacifications ofandare uniformly isomorphic (use[37, Proposition 3.24]and[14, Corollary 8.3.11]) by the extension of the identity map on. Hence,is a semitopological semigroup topologically isomorphic to.
∎

For an infinitechain(linearly oredered set)letbe the group ofautomorphisms(order-preserving bijections) of. A chainis calledhomogeneousif the actionis transitive (for anythere existssuch that).
A chainis called 2-homogeneousif for any pairs of pointsandthere existssuch that,.

(1) A 2-homogeneous chain isdense[27, Ch. 6, § 2](and, hence, has nojumps).

(2) A 2-homogeneous chain isultrahomogeneous[17, Lemma 1.10.1](see also[35]), i.e. for any families of differentpointsandthere existssuch that,,.

(3) A chain withoutproper gapsis calledcontinuous[27, Ch. 6, § 2]. If a chainis ultrahomogeneous and has a proper gap, then there is a gap on every nonempty interval of(is anintervalif).

(4) On the group, the permutation topologyis the smallest admissible group topology for the action, whereis a discrete space.is a subgroup.

A chainin the discrete topology is a GO-space (generalized ordered space). There is the smallest LOTS

in whichis a dense subspace[34], andis naturally embedded in any other linearly ordered extension of, in whichis dense. Hence, any linearly ordered compactification ofis a linearly ordered compactification of.
According to the description in[15], the smallest linearly ordered compactification[24]of(and, hence, of) is generated by replacing each gap (also improper) by a point with a natural continuation of the order (gaps inandare naturally identified). Therefore,, where,,,is the set of gaps.

There is the unique linearly ordered compactifications of, whenis a continuous chain. It is obtained by addition pointsandto.

Letbe an ultrahomogeneous chain and a discrete space,,is the maximal equiuniformity onfor the action. Then

and, whereis the completion of,

(and, hence,is Roelcke precompact),

(and, hence,andif),

the proper Ellis semigroup compactification(the completion of)is the set of selfmapsofin the t.p.c. such that

is monotone(if, then),

if,

if,, then,

either, or,,and

,,

the Roelcke compactificationis the set of mapsoftoin the t.p.c. such that(i’)is monotone,(ii’)if,, then.

Ifis continuous, then

,

is a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification.

(a) Firstly, the base of the maximal equiuniformityfor the actionis formed by the finite covers (of disjoint sets)

(,,). Hence,.

Secondly, the smallest linearly ordered compactificationofis zero-dimensional. In any open cover of a zero-dimensional compactumit is possible to refine a finite cover of pairwise distinct clopen intervals no one is a subset of the other. By introducing the order on the intervals (if), we obtain a disjoint cover of the clopen intervals, subtracting sequentially from theinterval the union of the previous ones. Let us correct the latter cover by removing endpoints of the formfrom the intervals (if any), and adding them as single-point clopen intervals to the corrected interval system to obtain an open coverof the space. Then(the trace ofon) obviously coincides with the cover from. Since any cover ofis extended to the cover of(is a trace of the cover), thenand the actionis extended to the action(for

,,;

,).

It is easy to check that the actionis correctly defined, it is continuous, its restriction tocoincides withand,,,are invariant subsets. Ifis an entourage correspondent to the cover, then.

The equalityand the inclusionin (b) follow from Lemma3.3and Theorem3.2respectively.

Proof of the equalityin (c). By Proposition2.8.

Since,, for the actioncoinsides withfor the actionand, one can take arbitrary, where,,.

In the case of the equiuniformitythe conditionin Proposition2.16can be reformulated in the following form

Letand. The construction of the automorphismis carried out on the intervals.

(I) The mapon the interval. Ifor(and hence,,,) and, then

Otherwise, in the caseif, then takesuch that,(and hence,). If, then,and. Takesuch that,(and hence,). Putifandif.

We assume thatand take,,(using continuity ofand the inequality). Sinceis ultrahomogeneous, there existssuch that.

In the casetakesuch that,(and hence,). We assume thatand take,,(using continuity ofand the inequality). Sinceis ultrahomogeneous, there existssuch that. Put

On the intervalthe construction is similar.

(II) The mapon on the interval,. If

,(and hence,,,,,,) and, or

,and, or

,and, then

Otherwise, let us examine the case,.

(a) If(and, hence,), then take,,and,,.. Putand.

(b) If,, then take,,and,,.. Putand.

(c) If,, then take,,and,,.. Putand.

(d) If,, take,,and,,.. Putand.

We assume that,. From the continuity ofand the inequalitythere exists,, such that, and from the inequalitythere exists,, such that. Sinceis ultrahomogeneous, there existsuch that,andsuch that.
Put

In the cases,,,and,considerations are similar.

It follows from the construction and the equalitythat,andfor any point. The conditionis valid for. Hence,.

By Corollary2.18the conditionis valid forand. Hence, all equalities and inclusions in (b) and (c) are proved.

From item (4) of Theorem3.2it follows that.

If, then,. Hence, by item (e) of Theorem2.22and (c) is proved.

(d) Fulfillment of conditions (i)–(v) for.

(i) Letand. Take disjoint nbds,ofandrespectively, which are intervals. Thenis a nbd of, but. Hence,.

(ii) Letand. Thenis a nbd of, but. Hence,.

(iii) Let,, and. Thenis a nbd of, but. Hence,.

(iv) If, then,by (ii) and then there exists. For the disjoint nbdsandofandrespectively,is a nbd of, but.

This argument works in the case. Therefore, eitherorand there is no(by the above argument) such thator. Hence,,,.

(v) Let. Take nbdof,. Thenis a nbd of, but. Hence,. The same argument works for.

Letsatisfies conditions (i)–(v). Take an arbitrary nbdofwhere, without lose of generality,, for anyonly one point of the form,, is in the set(use (iv)),,are clopen intervals,ifandif,(use condition (i)). Moreover, if(and hence,), then, if, then, if, then.

In order to construct automorphismwe sequentially determine two finite increasing sequences of pointsandin,.

If, thenby (ii),, and.

Let. If

and, or(by (iv)),

,

and, or(by (iv)),

then take any,(if, then) and put,.

If,and(by (iv)), then put,.

If,and(by (iv)), then put,.

If, then take any,and anysuch that(if, then; if, then).

Sinceis ultrahomogeneous there existsthat maps ordered sequence ofonto the ordered sequence of. Evidently,and.

(e) Since, the Roelcke compactificationofis the closure ofin. The restriction of the projectiontois a map of the proper Ellis semigroup compactificationonto. This gives the description ofas the set of mapsoftoin the t.p.c. such that (a)is monotone, (b) if, then.

Ifis continuous, then (b’) follows from the equalitiesand.

, becauseandfor.

Since,,, in order to proveit is enough to check the fulfillment of the conditionof Proposition2.14. Let us show that for anyand any pointthe following hold

Let, for example,and an arbitrary coveroffrombe of the form

where. It consists of disjoint sets.
Let us note that ifor,, or, thenor,, orrespectively.

Takeand the same coveron.

If, then. In particular, if, then,.

Ifor,, or, then,. The pair of points(and) is in one element of the cover, the pair of pointsis in one element of the cover. Hence, the pair of points,is in one element of the cover.

In the casethe same reasoning can be used and (b’) is proved.

(c’) follows from (b’).
∎

is not a semitopological semigroup.

Indeed, take the map,,otherwise. Any nbd of the map,,otherwise, is of the form,. Sincein any nbd ofof the form ofthere issuch that,,,. Hence,,otherwise and cann’t belong to the arbitary nbd ofthe form. Thus multiplication on the left inis not continuous.

Letbe an ultrahomogeneous chain and a discrete space,. Then

there is nosuch that,

iffis continuous.

(1) follows from the equality(item (c) of Theorem3.11) and items (d), (f) of Theorem2.22.

Sufficiency in (2) is proved in item (b’) of Theorem3.11. Necessity. Suppose thatis not continuous. It is enough to show thatby item (c) of Theorem3.11.

Takeand let,is a proper gap in,is such that.

For anylet,and. Takesuch thatandsuch that,. Letsends pointstoand identity on the points from. Thenand, hence, for any. Further,,. Therefore,.

It is shown that for anyandthe coveris not refined in the cover. Hence,.
∎

Corollary3.13shows that an oligomorphic action (see[43]and[41]) doesn’t guarantee that the Roelcke compactification of an acting group is a proper Ellis semigroup compactification.

An action of a groupon a chainis strongly-transitive,, if for any families ofpointsandthere existssuch that,.

An action, which is strongly-transitive for all, is called ultratransitive.

If an action ofon a chainis ultratransitive, thenis a dense subgroupandis a coset space of.

Indeed, for anyand a nbdof, ultransitivity of the actionyields that there exists.

Let an actionon a chain(discrete space)be ultratransitive,is the maximal equiuniformity on. Then

, whereis the maximal equiuniformity onfor the action,

and, whereis the Roelcke uniformity on,

,

andare topologically isomorphic proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactifications.

Ifis continuous, then the Roelcke compactificationsandare topologically isomorphic proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactifications. If the Roelcke compactificationsis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification, thenis continuous.

(a) follows from ultratransitivity of action.

(b)andin (b) follows from (a) and the definition of Ellis equiuniformity.by Remark3.16and[37, Proposition 3.24]and Roelcke precompact. Since(item (b) of Theorem3.11),and (b) is proved.

(c) Sinceby (b) and items (1), (2) of Theorem3.2,(item (f) of Theorem2.22).

(d) follows from (b) and Remark3.16.

andare uniformly isomorphic by the extension of the identity map on(sinceis dense in).

Ifis continuousandis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification (items (b’) and (c’) of Theorem3.11).

Ifis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of, thenis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification of(is a right topological semigroup and the actionis extended to the action, becauseis dense inandis contained in the Raikov completion ofto which the action is extended[31]). By Corollary3.13is continuous and the last statement is proved.
∎

The action of the Thompson groupis ultratransitive on the chain (not continuous)of dyadic rational numbers ofand every automorphism fromis a piecewise-linear map that have a finite number of breakpoints[10].

By Theorem3.11and Corollary3.17is Roelcke precompact, however,and the least proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification which is greater than the Roelcke compactification ofis the completion of.

The description ofis given above. Clopen intervals with endpoints whose first coordinates (following the description) are dyadic rational numbers form the countable base of the topology of. Hence,is a metrizable linearly ordered compacta (see,[33, Example 5.4]).

by item (b) of Corollary3.17and its description is given in item (e) of Theorem3.11.

SECTION: 3.2.The mapsandfor the action of the unitary group on a Hilbert space

Letbe the unitary group of a (complex or real) Hilbert space. It is a group of isometries for the action ofon the unit sphere,is a coset space ofunder its action[39, § 2.1](is thestrong operator topology) and the stabilizerof any pointis a neutral subgroup of[26, Remark 3.14].

Letbe the set of all finite-dimensional subspaces of,theunit ball,is theunit spherein,.

The sets,,, form a base at the unity in.

For every

If, where,,and, then for any, one has, where,, and

Therefore,.
∎

The maximal equiuniformityonis totally bounded.

Let,is such that, and, without loss of generality, is of the form,,, by Lemma3.19.

Let,andbe the orthogonal projections,. One can define a continuous map,. Sincefor, the restrictionofto the unit sphere sends points ofto the compact set.

The mapis a composition of the projectionand the map,, which is a homeomorphism ofand. To show that the mapis open it is sufficient to show thatis open.

Let us note that the mapis uniformly continuous. Hence, for anythere existssuch that if, then.

Takeand its nbd, where. For anysuch thattake. The pointand

sinceand the choice ofand. Thus,. This shows that(and, hence,) is open.

For the actionthe group(stabilizer of points of the subspace) is naturally identified with the unitary group. The sphereis an invariant subset which orbit spaceis identified with. Since the map ofonto the orbit spaceis open,is homeomorphic to.

The cover, its imageis an open cover of the compactumand has a finite refinement,. Since, the finite open cover,, ofis refined in. Therefore,is totally bounded.
∎

Another resoning (which uses Roelcke precompactness of[44]) to prove that the maximal equiuniformityonis totally bounded can be found in[26, Example 3.31].

The base of the uniformityis formed by the entourages

In[42, Corollary 2.2]it is shown that the unit ballinin the weak topology (the topology initial with respect to the projections on finite-dimensional subspaces) is the maximal-compactification of(completion of).

Therefore, the entourages fromare of the form

and the entourages fromare of the form

whereis the orthogonal projection ofonto. Without lose of generality, one can assume that,and.

For

Therefore,and

Let, then for any, one has, where,, and

Therefore, if,, thenand

∎

For the actionof the unitary groupof a Hilbert spaceon the the unit sphereand the maps,one has:

(and, hence,is Roelcke precompact[44], andis a proper enveloping Ellis semigroup compactification),

is the space of all linear operators onof normin the weak operator topology[44],

is a semitopological semigroup[44].

By Proposition3.20and item (1) of Theorem3.2to prove (a) one can check the fulfillment of the inclusions,and.

The proof of the inclusionsand. For any,, let.

Then(,). Since,.

If,, then there existssuch that.

Therefore, if,are in one element of the cover, then,are in one element of its extension to. Sincefor any,(subbases of correspondent uniformities coincide).

The proof of the inclusion. In the proof of Theorem 1.1 from[44](item (c)) it is shown that for any,,, there exist,andsuch that ifand

then.

The condition (w.o.t) defines the basic entourage of the uniformity, completion with respect to which is the (compact) unit ball in the space of all bounded operators equipped with theweak operator topology. This uniformity coincides with the uniformityby Lemma3.22.

Let us note that ifand the condition (w.o.t) is fulfilled, then for the adjoint operatorsthe same condition (w.o.t) is fulfilled. Indeed,

Therefore, ifand the condition (w.o.t) is fulfilled, then, where,. Hence,,,(since,) and, finally,. Hence,.

(b) From (a) it follows thatis the closure ofin. Since,, for all,,, for(iffor some, then for the nbdofsuch that,).

Forlet us show thatis the restriction of a linear map on.

(1) If, then. Indeed,and since,, one has,. Assume that. Take disjoint nbdsofandof. Since addition inis continuous there are nbdsandsuch that. Take the open setin., but. Hence,.

(2) If, thenforsuch that. Indeed, assume that,,, then,. Take disjoint nbdsofandof. Since multiplication on the scalar inis continuous there is nbdsuch that. Take the open setin., but. Hence,.

Put,. For anyand any

For any

From (2) and (C),. Therefore anyis a restriction of a linear map on.

Letbe any linear operator onof norm,is its restriction to. The arbitrary nbd ofis of the form, where, without loss of generality,are linearly independent,are open subsets ofin the weak topology such thatand,, wherepris the orthogonal projection ofto the finite dimensional subspace.

Letbe any linear isometry of theto the-dimensional subspace ofandits extension to the linear isometry of(any linear isometry of the orthogonal complement to theto the orthogonal complement to the imagecan be chosen). Thenand, hence,.

(c) follows from (b) (all elements ofare continuous in the weak operator topology).
∎

SECTION: References