SECTION: Twisted right-angled Artin groups embedded in knot groups

Twisted right-angled Artin groups are defined through presentation based on mixed graphs.
Each vertex corresponds to a generator, each undirected edge yields a commuting relation and
each directed edge gives a Klein bottle relation.
If there is no directed edge, then this reduces to an ordinary right-angled Artin group.

There is a characterization of right-angled Artin groups which can be embedded in knot groups by Katayama.
In this paper,
we completely determine twisted right-angled Artin groups embedded in knot groups.

SECTION: 1.Introduction

Twisted right-angled Artin groups (abbreviated as TRAAGs) are introduced in[4](also[21]) as a natural generalization of right-angled Artin groups (RAAGs).
For TRAAGs, there are a few of recent results[1,7].
In particular, there is a characterization of TRAAGs with torsion, or left ordering.

Recall the definition of TRAAG (see[1,7]).
Letbe a mixed graph, whereis a (finite) simple graph, andis a subset of.
An element ofis called a directed edge.
If a directed edge has a tailand a head, then we denote it by.
An undirected edge connectingandis written as.
Then thetwisted right-angled Artin group based onis
defined as

If, thenis the ordinary right-angled Artin group based on.
The second type of relationis called theKlein relation([7]).

Droms[6]gave a complete characterization of RAAGs which are-manifold groups, that is, the fundamental groups
of connected-manifolds.
Precisely, a RAAGis a-manifold group if and only if each connected component ofis a tree or a triangle.
This leads us to a natural question.

Which TRAAGs are-manifold groups?

As the simplest example, letbe a single arc.
More precisely, it consists of two vertices and a single directed edge.
Thenis isomorphic to the fundamental group of the Klein bottle.
(The Klein relation originates from this.)
Hencecan be realized as the fundamental group of the twisted-bundle over the Klein bottle.
In general, the answer to Question1.1is widely open.

Katayama[15]gives a complete characterization of RAAGs which embed into a knot group, the fundamental group
of the complement of a knot in the-sphere.
For readers’ convenience, we state his result below (Theorem1.2).

In general, if a grouphas a subgroup isomorphic to a group, then
we say thatembeds into.
If there is no confusion, then we often write.

Letbe a knot in the-sphere.
The knot exterioradmits the torus decomposition, or the JSJ decomposition (see[13,14,22]), where
each piece is hyperbolic or Seifert fibered.
We remark that a Seifert fibered piece is either a composing space, a torus knot exterior or a cable space.
Any of these admits the unique Seifert fibration.
If there are two Seifert fibered pieces glued along a common boundary torus, then
the pair is called aSeifert-Seifert gluing.

A complete bipartite graphwithis called a star.
A path withvertices is.
In particular,is a single vertex.
A forest is a graph containing no cycles.
Hence every connected component of a forest is a tree.
These are undirected graphs.
The disjoint union of two graphsandis denoted by.
Also,denotes the disjoint union ofcopies of.

Thus.
We note that, a free group of rank,,
and.

Letbe a non-trivial knot inwith exteriorand knot group.
Letbe an undirected graph, andthe associated RAAG.

Ifconsists of only hyperbolic pieces, thenembeds intoif and only iffor.

Ifis Seifert fibered, that is,is a torus knot, thenembeds intoif and only ifis eitheror a single starfor.

Ifcontains both of a Seifert fibered piece and a hyperbolic piece, and there is no Seifert-Seifert gluing, thenembeds intoif and only ifwith. (Possibly, there is no star.)

Ifcontains a Seifert-Seifert gluing, thenembeds intoif and only ifis a forest.

For the unknot, the knot group is an infinite cyclic group.
Hence onlycan embed there.

In this paper, we focus on TRAAGs embedded in a knot group, and give a complete characterization of such TRAAGs.
To state our main theorem, we add some terminologies.

For an integer, asink staris a star digraph withvertices anddirected edges which share the same head.
See Figure1.

Ifhas the central vertex(of degree) and end vertices, then
the associated TRAAGhas a presentation

A (non-trivial) torus knot of typeis said to beof even type, and
its exterior is referred to as atorus knot exterior of even type.
Similarly, the exterior of a torus knot of type, which lies on the boundary of a smaller solid torusin a solid toruswithand runstimes along, is called acable space of even type.
(In this case,is possible.)
ASeifert fibered piece of even typemeans either of them.

Letbe a mixed graph with at least one directed edge, and letbe the TRAAG based on.
Letbe a non-trivial knot inwith exteriorand knot group.

Ifconsists of only hyperbolic pieces, thencannot containas a subgroup.

Ifis Seifert fibered, that is,is a torus knot, thenembeds intoif and only ifis a (non-trivial) torus knot of even type andis a single sink starwith.

Ifcontains both of a Seifert fibered piece and a hyperbolic piece, and there is no Seifert-Seifert gluing, thenembeds intoif and only if
there is at least one Seifert fibered piece of even type, andfor,andhas at least one sink star.

Ifcontains a Seifert-Seifert gluing, thenembeds intoif and only if
there is at least one Seifert fibered piece of even type, andfor, whereis a forest andhas at least one sink star. (Possibly,is empty.)

We remark that there is no upper bound for the number of stars or sink stars in cases (3) and (4) above.
Since we assume thathas at least one directed edge,
no TRAAG can embed into the knot group of the unknot (see Section2).

Throughout the paper, we use the following notation.
In a group, the commutator betweenandis(although the symbol is the same as an undirected edge,
it may not cause a confusion), and
the conjugate ofwithis.
For a subgroupand,denotes the conjugate subgroup.

If an elementsatisfies the relationfor some, and,
thenis called ageneralized torsion element of order two[10](or a reversible element[5]).
If both ofandbelong to a subgroupof, then
the pairis called ageneralized torsion pair in[10].

SECTION: 2.Preliminaries

We put the following assumption on mixed graphs throughout the paper.

Assumption.Any mixed graphhas at least one directed edge.
That is,.

Let, and letbe
the induced subgraph spanned byin.
Thenis isomorphic to the subgroupgenerated byin.

The corresponding claim for RAAGs is also well known (see[15]).

The next lemma is crucial to our argument, and it will be used repeatedly.

Letbe a mixed graph consisting of a single directed edge.
Ifembeds into a knot group,
thencontains a Seifert fibered pieceof even type such thatis conjugate into.
More precisely,for some, and, whereis the (unique) exceptional fiber of indexin.

Under the assumption of Lemma2.2,is the fundamental group of the Klein bottle.
Theorem 1.4 of[10]shows thatfor some Seifert fibered pieceof,
and Theorem 1.10 of[10](and its proof) describes.
Thusgives a regular fiber of, which is central in.

By Lemmas2.1and2.2, we see that the knot group of the unknot does not admit a TRAAG.
Also, any TRAAG itself cannot be a knot group, since the abelianization of a TRAAG (with a directed edge)
contains a-torsion[7].

Theorem1.3(1) immediately follows from these lemmas.

If the knot exteriorconsists of only hyperbolic pieces,
thendoes not admit a TRAAG as a subgroup.

In particular, the knot group of a hyperbolic knot cannot contain a TRAAG.

Suppose thatfor a mixed graph.
By our assumption,has a directed edge, which gives an induced subgraph.
Thuscontains a Seifert fibered piece by Lemmas2.1and2.2.
∎

For a mixed graph, theunderlying graphis just the graph
obtained fromby forgetting the orientation of all directed edges.

First, we want to exclude triangles in a mixed graph when the corresponding TRAAG embeds into a knot group.
There are 7 possibilities of triangles as shown in Figure2.

Letbe a mixed graph.
Assume thatembeds into a knot group.
Then the underlying graphofcannot contain a triangle.

Assume that the underlying graphcontains a triangle, and
letbe the corresponding subgraph of.
Letbe the vertices.
Note thatis the induced subgraph of.
Henceby Lemma2.1.
We eliminate all possible types as shown in Figure2.

(a) corresponds to, which is impossible by[19, Theorem 5.4.2].
(b) corresponds to, whereis the fundamental group of the Klein bottle.
Since, we havein a knot group, impossible again.

Consider a triangleof type (c).
Let,andbe the edges.
Then, andcommutes withand.
We claim.
Suppose not.
Thenfor some integers.
Recall that we have relationsand.
This means thatand.
By taking a conjugate ofwith, we have.
Thus, which implies.
So,, which contradicts the fact that any knot group is torsion-free.
We have thus shown that.
This is impossible as before.

For (d), let,andbe the edges.
Then.
Consider the centralizerofin the knot group.
It contains.
Since,also belongs to.

We claim that.
Assume.
Thenfor some integers.
By conjugating with,.
On the other hand,implies.
Hence, so, a contradiction.

Thus we have shown thatis bigger than.
This implies that there exists a Seifert fibered pieceof the knot exterior(with respect to the torus decomposition)
andsuch thatandis equal to the centralizer ofin([2,13]).

For simplicity of notation, we keep using the same symbols after taking conjugations with.
Thus,, andis bigger than.
Henceis a power of a regular fiber of(see the paragraph after Theorem 2.5.2 of[2]), and.
There are only three possibilities of; a torus knot exterior, a cable space or a composing space.

Note thatcontains the Klein bottle group.
(has a subgroup, which contains
a subgroup.
By taking a conjugate with, we find the above subgroup of.)
This means thatcontains a generalized torsion element of order two.
Henceis not a composing space[10], and has an (unique) exceptional fiberof even index.

However,[10, Theorem 1.10]claims thatis conjugate to a power of the exceptional fiberin.
In fact,for some.
Recall thatis a power of a regular fiber. So,for some integer, andis central in.
Sincehas index, we have.
Thus

This contradicts thatin.

Consider (e).
Similarly, let,andbe the edges.
Since,
it has a subgroup.

We claim.
Suppose not. Thenfor some integers,and.
Recall.
By taking a conjugate with, we have, so.
This is impossible.
Sincecommutes withand,, a contradiction.

(f) leads to a torsion by[1], impossible.

Finally, consider (g).
There are three edges,and.
Thenis the Klein bottle group, which has an index two subgroup.
Consider the centralizer. It containsand.

We claim.
Suppose not.
Thenfor some integersand.
Taking a conjugate withgives.
Hence, which gives.
Thus.
However, this contradicts thatis the Klein bottle group.

Thusis bigger than.
As in (d), there exists a Seifert fibered pieceof, and we can assume that, after conjugations.
Then,is a power of a regular fiber, and.

On the other hand,contains the Klein bottle group.
Hencehas a generalized torsion element of order two.
As in (d),is conjugate to a power of an exceptional fiber in.
This leads to a contradiction thatinas in (d).
∎

For a mixed graph, assume thatembeds into a knot group.
Then
the RAAGbased on the underlying graphis a subgroup of.

This follows from[21].
Letbe the generators of.
Thensatisfies the conditionsandof[21], by Lemma2.4.
Theorem 2(iv) of[21]claims that the squaresgenerate
a subgroup ofwhose the only defining relations areif.
Clearly, this subgroup is isomorphic to.
∎

As remarked before, Droms[6]shows that
a RAAGis a-manifold group if and only if each connected component ofis
a tree or.
Since we consider only knot groups, we can say more as in[15].

If a RAAGembeds into a knot group, then each connected component ofis a tree.
Henceis a forest.

Note.
Sincecannot embed into a knot group (see[19, Theorem 5.4.2]),
the conclusion immediately follows from the above claim of Droms[6].
∎

We can prove an analogous result for TRAAGs owing to Lemma2.5.

If a TRAAGembeds into a knot group, then the underlying graphofis a forest.

Assume thatcontains a cycle for a contradiction.
We can assume that the vertices of the cycle span an induced cycle.
Thenhas a subgroup.
By Lemma2.5,, which is impossible by Lemma2.6.
∎

SECTION: 3.Torus knots

Among torus knots, we can restrict ourselves to torus knots of even type by Lemma2.2.
In this section, we prove the following.

Letbe a non-trivial torus knot of even type.
Then a TRAAGembeds intoif and only ifis a sink starfor some.

Clearly, a sink starhas an induced subgraphfor any.
Hence, ifembeds into, then so doesby Lemma2.1.
Buthas no directed edge, so we exclude this possibility from the conclusion.
(Compare Theorem1.2(2).)

First, we confirm that the TRAAG based on a sink star can embed intofor a non-trivial torus knotof even type.

Let, and letbe a sink star withvertices.
Ifis a non-trivial torus knot of even type, thencan embed into.

Letbe the standard presentation of.
Note thatis central.
Setfor.
Then.
For,

We show thatgenerates a free group of rankin.
First,.
This follows from the observation

in the amalgamated free product.
(Note that.)
Second, letsuch that eachandfor.
Then we see. For, if bothor, then there is no cancellation in the productas shown above.
Also, if, then each of

yields a non-trivial reduced word.
Thusis an alternate sequence ofand, which impliesin.

Hence the setgenerates a free subgroup of rankin(see[17, Proposition 1.9]).
Thus.
∎

A similar argument shows that if, thencan embed into the fundamental group of a cable space of even type.

Letbe a cable space of type.
Then, whererepresents the exceptional fiber of index.
Setforas before.
Thenis central in, and.

Note thatis the amalgamated free product,
andis reduced there. The remaining argument is the same as in the proof of Proposition3.2.

Conversely, we suppose that a TRAAGembeds into a torus knot group.
We will show thatis a sink star.

is a star.

By Lemma2.5, the RAAGcan embed into.
Then Theorem1.2([15]) shows thatis a star.
(Since we are assuming thathas at least one directed edge, we can exclude the case whereis an empty graph.)
∎

Ifhas order two, thenis a sink star.
Hence we assume thathas at least three vertices.
Letbe the central vertex, and letbe the end vertices.

There is no directed edge with tail.

Assume that there is a directed edge.
Thenfor some, whereis the exceptional fiber of indexby Lemma2.2.
Hence, whereis a regular fiber.
Then, becauseis central in.
Thusis also central.
However, this contradicts the fact thatwithis a free subgroup of rank two inby Lemma2.1.
∎

is a sink star.

By our assumption thathas at least one directed edge and Lemma3.5,
there is a directed edge.

Suppose that there is an undirected edgewithfor a contradiction.
Again,for some, whereis the exceptional fiber of index,
and, a regular fiber, as in the proof of Lemma3.5.

Let.
Then.
Consider the natural projection

Note thatandcommute in, so doand.
Here,.
Thuslies in a conjugate subgroup, orandare both powers of the same element (see[18, Corollary 4.1.6]).

In the former,for some integers.
Then, socommutes with.
This contradicts thatandgenerate a free group of rank two.

In the latter, setandfor some integers.
Then, which implies thatfor some integer.
Further,, sois a power of.
Thuscommutes with, which is impossible as above.
∎

This follows from Propositions3.2and3.6.
∎

A similar argument gives the next.

Letbe a cable space of even type, and let.
Then a TRAAGembeds intoif and only ifis a sink starfor some.

The “if” part is given in Remark3.3.
Suppose thatembeds into.
Lemmas3.4and3.5hold again.

As in Remark3.3,
let, whererepresents the exceptional fiber of index.
Set, which is a regular fiber.
By using the natural projection

the remaining argument goes on as in the proof of Proposition3.6.
∎

SECTION: 4.Group theoretic results

In this section, we prove some technical results for the remaining sections.

SECTION: 4.1.Amalgamated free product

For a knot exterior, choose an essential torusfrom the torus decomposition.
This torus decomposesintoand.
(They are not necessarily pieces arisen from the torus decomposition.)
Hence.

Keeping this in mind, consider an amalgamated free product.
Select the right coset representative systemsformodandmod(see[18]).

For, ifis conjugate into, thenfor some.

By the assumption,for some.
If, then we are done.
If, then, a contradiction.
Hence we assume.

Set, and letbe the reduced form of, where(possibly,) andare representatives.
In particular,,or, andanddo not belong to the same factor.

Then the proof of[18, Theorem 4.6(i)]claims that
in the sequence

any element except the last belongs to.

Let.
(When, set.)
Then.
If, then

has representative length, becauseand.
Thus.
Since, we are done.
∎

Let. Suppose thatis not conjugate into.
Iffor, then.

Letbe the reduced form of.
Supposefor a contradiction.
Then either, orand.

Suppose. Then

Since, both sides have distinct representative lengths, a contradiction.

Suppose thatand.
Then we havein the right hand side of (4.1).
Hence both side have distinct representative lengths again.
∎

SECTION: 4.2.Generalized torsion pair

We consider the situation where a knot groupcontains
a generalized torsion pair.
Equivalently, we have a subgroup([9]).
By Lemma2.2, the knot exteriorcontains
a Seifert fibered pieceof even type, which is either
a torus knot exterior or a cable space.
We exclude the case where, because the torus knots are done in Section3.
After a conjugation, we may assume that[10].
That is, the pairis a generalized torsion pair in.

In this subsection, we prove that neithernorlies infor any boundary torus
componentof.

Letbe a boundary component of a Seifert fibered pieceof the knot exterior.
Ifis a generalized torsion pair in,
then.

Supposefor a contradiction.
We divide the argument into two cases.

Case 1.is a torus knot exterior of type.

On, we have a standard meridian-longitude pair, whereis null-homologous in.
Let.
Thenimplies.
Since, we have.

We may assume. Here, we make use of stable commutator length.
For,(see[3,11,12]).
This contradicts that any generalized torsion element of order two has scl([11]).

Case 2.is a cable space of type.

For a solid torus, take a concentric smaller solid toruswith, and acurveon, runningtimes along.
Thenis homeomorphic to the exterior ofin.
Letandbe a meridian-longitude pair on,
and letbe the core of(and).
Then.

First, set. Then,
and we can putfor some integersand.
Since,,
whereis a meridian of the curve.
However,implies, so, a contradiction.

Second, letbe the boundary of the tubular neighborhood of.
Letbe a regular fiber of.
Then, and
set.
As before,implies.
However,

Hence, soagain.
∎

Ifis a generalized torsion pair, then so isfor any.
For,implies.
(Of course, we need, which follows from the fact thatis torsion-free.)
Thus Lemma4.3shows thatfor any.

Letbe a boundary component of a Seifert fibered pieceof the knot exterior.
Ifis a generalized torsion pair in,
then.

By Lemma2.2,for someand the (unique) exceptional fiberwith index.
In particular,gives a regular fiber.

Case 1.is a torus knot exterior of type.

On, choose a standard meridian-longitude pair, whereis null-homologous in.
Then.
Since, we have.

Suppose. Thenfor some integersand, and.
Hence.
For,
consider.
In,, so.
Then, which contradicts thatis torsion-free.

Case 2.is a cable space of type.

As in the proof of Lemma4.3,
we have a presentation, where.

First, set.
Assume, and set.
Then.
Since, we have.
Hence

As before,in, so.
Thenand.
However, this is impossible, becauseis odd.

Second, letbe the boundary of the neighborhood of the curve.
Then.
Assume. Then, so.
Again, consider.
Then

because.
This contradicts.
∎

SECTION: 5.Directed edges in a mixed graph

By Corollary2.3and Theorem3.1,
the remaining case is whenadmits a Seifert fibered pieceof even type.
We suppose this situation throughout this section.

Letbe a mixed graph with directed edge.
Suppose thatembeds into a knot group.
By Lemma2.2, we may assume that.
Thusgives a generalized torsion pair in, that is,, equivalently.

There are two possibilities for.
Ifis a torus knot exterior, thensplitsintoand, say.
That is,, so.
Ifis cable space, then there are two cases.
Ifcontains, then chooseas another boundary component.
Otherwise, we can choose either boundary component as.
Thussplitsinto, which contains(possibly,), and.
Then.
Hence the torus knot exterior case can also be regarded as the latter when.
Since, the pairis also a generalized torsion pair in.

Neithernoris conjugate intoin.

Consider the element.
By Lemma4.3,.
Assume thatfor some.
By Lemma4.1, we can assume that.

Suppose thatis a torus knot exterior. Then.
By taking a conjugation with,yields.
Thus a new pairis another generalized torsion pair in.
This contradicts Lemma4.3.

Suppose thatis a cable space.
If, then we are done as above.
Otherwise, letbe the other boundary component of.
Then, so.
We remark thatby Lemma4.3.

Ifis not conjugate intoin, then Lemma4.2implies.
Again,gives a generalized torsion pair in, contradicting Lemma4.3.

Thusfor some.
However, we can assume thatby Lemma4.1.
Thengives a generalized torsion pair in,
contradicting Lemma4.3again.

The argument for the elementis the same. Use Lemma4.5instead of Lemma4.3.
∎

Letbe a mixed graph with directed edge.
Assume thatembeds into a knot group.
Then

there is neither an undirected edgenor a directed edgewith; and

there is neither an undirected edgenor a directed edge.

By Lemma2.7, each connected component ofis a tree.

(1)
If there is an edgeorwith, then
we have a relationin.

Consideras above.
We have(Lemma4.3) andis not conjugate intoin(Lemma5.1).
Lemma4.2implies.

If, then we have.
This is impossible by Proposition3.6and Theorem3.7.

If, then consider a splittingas in the proof of Lemma5.1.
Then.
Sinceis not conjugate intoinby Lemma5.1(we can choose any boundary component ofas),
Lemma4.2implies, so, impossible again.

(2)
Sinceis simple (no multiple edges),automatically.
The rest of the argument is the same as (1). Use Lemma4.5instead of Lemma4.3.
∎

Letbe a mixed graph.
Ifembeds into a knot group, then each connected component ofhaving
a directed edge is a sink star.

This immediately follows from Proposition5.2.∎

SECTION: 6.No Seifert-Seifert gluing

In this section, we consider the case wherecontains both a Seifert piece and a hyperbolic piece, and there is no Seifert-Seifert gluing.

Suppose thatcontains both a Seifert piece and a hyperbolic piece, and that there is no Seifert-Seifert gluing.
Then a TRAAGembeds intoif and only if
there is at least one Seifert fibered piece of even type, andforand. (By our assumption,has at least one sink star.)

First, we prove the “if” part.

Suppose thatcontains both a Seifert piece and a hyperbolic piece, and that there is no Seifert-Seifert gluing.
Letforand, where there is at least one sink star.
Ifcontains at least one Seifert fibered piece of even type, thenembeds into.

Letbe a Seifert fibered piece of even type, anda hyperbolic piece which
shares a torus boundary.
Then.
We know thatfor anyby Proposition3.2and
Remark3.3.

Takeandsuch thatfor any non-zero integer.
(The choice ofis attained by taking a loxodromic element in.) We remark thatis malnormal in[8].

Forwith,gives a reduced word whose first and last lie in.

If, thenis reduced.
Otherwise.
Thenby the malnormality.
Henceis reduced.
∎

In,.

Letbe a non-empty reduced word.
Assume.
We can assume that

where,andafter conjugation.
Then we haveandis a non-zero power of.
By Claim6.3and, this gives a non-empty reduced word, a contradiction.
∎

Thus we have a free product subgroup.

For a given mixed graph, let.
For any finite sumof,, so.
(This can be seen by taking a covering space of a wedge of a-complexwithand a circle.)

If we take sufficiently many copies of, thenby Lemmas2.1and2.5.
Thus we have.
∎

The “if” part is shown in Proposition6.2.

Conversely, suppose thatembeds into.
By Lemma2.5and Theorem1.2,
we know that.
By Corollary5.3, each connected component ofhaving a directed edge is a sink star.
Hence the conclusion follows.
∎

SECTION: 7.Seifert-Seifert gluing

Finally, we prove the next to complete the proof of Theorem1.3.

Assume thatcontains a Seifert-Seifert gluing.
Then a TRAAGembeds intoif and only if
there is at least one Seifert fibered piece of even type,
andfor, whereis a forest andhas at least one sink star. (Possibly,is empty.)

SECTION: 7.1.Katayama’s embedding of

We assume thatcontains a Seifert-Seifert gluing in this section.
Letandbe such Seifert fibered pieces with a common torus boundary.
Then Katayama[15](also[20]) observes.
Sincefor any forest[16],
it implies.

Let.
We briefly recall the constructionof[15].

Letbeor.
Whenis a torus knot space,has a subgroup,
where the commutator subgroup is a free group of rank.
Note that this subgroup has finite index.
Ifis a composing space, whereis the-holed disk,
then.
Finally, ifis a cable space, then it has a finite cyclic cover homeomorphic to
a composing space.
In any case,has a finite index subgroupfor some, where thefactor is generated by a regular fiber.
For, this subgroup is denoted by.

Letbe a regular fiber of. Then.
Note thaton, becauseandare adjacent distinct pieces.
We do not know whetherand.
But, sincehas finite index in,
a sufficiently high power of(resp.) lies in(resp.).
Letbe such a power.
Finally, takeso thatis free.
(Although we do not know whether, we can take.)

Thus we haveand, which are isomorphic to, and.
Hencegives.

Under this situation, we prove a technical result.
We keep using the above notation.

Let.
There exists an elementsuch thatfor anyand thatis a free group of rank three.

In fact,.

We divide the argument into three cases.

Case 1.is a torus knot exterior.

Recall that, whereis the commutator subgroup of.
Since,for any.
Hence we can chooseso thatis free.
This implies, otherwiseandwould commute.

We verify thatfor any.

Letbe the meridian and longitude pair on.
For a givenwith, suppose.
Thenfor some integers.
Hence.
Then, so.
This means thatcommutes with.
Since the centralizer ofis([2]),.
By homological reason,is a power of.
However, such a relationis impossible in the commutator subgroup which is free,
becauseis not a power of.

Case 2.is a composing space.

Then, and.
Hence.
(Possibly,is a power of.)
In this case, we can chooseso thatis a free group of rank three in.
In particular,.

Again,
we see thatfor.
For, choose the generators, whereis represented by a component of.
Letwith.
Suppose.
Thenfor some integersand.
Sinceis central,, so.
Since,.
Thus, becauseis a regular fiber representing the-factor of.
Then we have a relationin.
This is impossible, becauseis not a power of.

Case 3.is a cable space.

The cable spaceis obtained from a solid torusby removing
a tubular neighborhood of a torus knot of type, lying on a smaller concentric torus.
A punctured meridian diskcorresponds to the-factor of.
The-factor comes from a regular fiber.
Hence we can chooseso thatis a free group of rank three.

We may assume thatis the inner boundary component by the symmetry of.
Again, we know.
Letbe the meridian and longitude pair on.
For, assume that.
Ifwith, then.
Thus, so.
As in Case 1, we have, which impliesfor somefrom homological reason.

Consider the finite cyclic coverof, corresponding
to the kernel of,
sendingand, whereon.
Then, and the relationyieldsfor suitable liftsofand. This implies, because.
Hence we havein.
However, this is impossible, because the centralizer ofisand∎

SECTION: 7.2.Embedding of

From now, we assume thatis a Seifert fibered piece of even type, and.
By Lemma7.2, we take an element.
Also, applying Lemma7.2to, we have an elementwith a similar property to.
Recall thatis a regular fiber of, and set.

Forwith,gives a reduced word in the amalgamated free productwhose first and last lie in.

If, thensatisfies the conclusion.
If, then.
Thusgives the reduced word.
Finally, if, thenand, sois reduced.
∎

Ifwith, thengives a reduced word in
the amalgamated free productwhose first and last lie in.

Recall that.
First, we deal with the case wheredoes not contain a power of.
Then.
If, thenis reduced.
Suppose.
If, then.
Thusis reduced.
If, then, and.
Thereforeis reduced.

Thus we may assume thatcontains a non-zero power of.
We write

wherecontains no,,, and possiblyor.
Furthermore, we may assume thatis not a power of, since.
Ifis a non-zero power of, thenis merged into, or.
For the latter, since,, then we are done.
Similarly, ifis a power of, thenis merged into, or.
The latter can be treated as above.
Hence, we may assume that anyis not a non-zero power of.

Now,

If, then we are done.
Assume.
Sincedoes not contain, andis central in,
we can write, whereinvolves onlyand.
Possibly,, and either letter does not appear.

Then.
Note thatand thatis not a power of,
becauseis a free group of rank three.

Iflies in, then.
However,in, which
contradicts thatis a free group of rank three.

The argument foris similar.
∎

Here, we introduce a symbol.
For example,is a non-zero power of,is a word consisting
of only a non-zero power ofand, both of which appear.
We can suppose that such a word has the shortest length among the words representing the same element in.

Fordefined in (7.1),
there are five possibilities:

,,

,

,

,

.

The remaining is to show that the middle segment of (7.2),

gives a reduced word whose first and last lie in.

First, ifhas a form of (2), that is, a power of, then.
(4) is similar.
For (3), if, then.
Sinceis not a power of, this contradicts thatis a free
group of rank two.
For (5), if, then, so, a contradiction again.
Thus wheneverhas a form of (2)–(5),.

Finally, among, we look at them of type (1).
Ifis of type (1) butis not of type (1), then
set.
Clearly,.
Assumefor a contradiction.
We can writewith.
Then, so, which
contradicts thatis a free group of rank two.
Thus.
This argument works whenis of type (1), but neithernoris of type (1).

If there are successive’s of type (1),, say, then
set

(Here,andare not of type (1).)
Then the same argument shows.
∎

We prove thatcan embed into.

In,

The argument is similar to that of Claim6.4. (Use Lemmas7.3and7.4.) ∎

SECTION: 7.3.Final argument

Assume thatcontains a Seifert-Seifert gluing, and there is at least one Seifert fibered piece
of even type.
Letfor, whereis a forest andhas at least one sink star.
Thencan embed into.

First, assume thatcontains a Seifert fibered pieceof even type which
is glued to a Seifert fibered piece.
Let.
By Proposition7.6, we can embedinto.
Recall that([16]), sinceis still a forest.
Thus.
Here, we can embedas in the proof of Proposition6.2.
Hence

Second, we assume that there is no Seifert fibered piece of even type which is adjacent to a Seifert fibered piece.
Letbe a Seifert fibered piece of even type. We havefor any.
By the assumption, there is a Seifert-Seifert gluing.
Letandbe such Seifert fibered pieces.
We know that.

Let us choose a boundary componentofsuch thatsplitsintoand, and,.
In particular,is a boundary component of a hyperbolic piece.
Then.
We remark thatis malnormal in[8].

Takeand.

Forwith,gives a reduced word whose first and last lie in.

Forwith,gives a reduced word whose first and last lie in.

(1)
The argument is the same as (1) of Claim6.3.

(2) If, thengives a reduced word.
Suppose.
If, thenis reduced.
Otherwise,by the malnomality.
Thusitself is reduced.
∎

As in Proposition7.6,
we can show thatin.
The rest of the argument is the same as the first situation.
∎

The “if” part is Theorem7.7.
We prove the “only if’ part.
By Lemma2.5and Theorem1.2,is a forest.
On the other hand, each connected component ofhaving a directed edge is a sink star by Corollary5.3.
∎

This immediately follows from
Corollary2.3, Theorems3.1,6.1and7.1.
∎

SECTION: Acknowledgment

We would like to thank Ryoya Kai
for helpful conversations.

SECTION: References