SECTION: 1Introduction

The relation between knot polynomial invariants and the 3-dimensional Chern–Simons (CS) gauge theory[1,2]is well known and has led to an increasingly fruitful interchange between pure mathematics and theoretical physics.

The HOMFLY–PT polynomial[3,4]of a knot or link, is a Laurent polynomial in two variables that can be defined via the skein relation

along with normalisation condition(⃝)=1.
It corresponds to the-invariant in the context of CS theory, within which one can derive the quantityby taking averages of Wilson loops around the knot. This can be related to the HOMFLY–PT polynomial as defined in (1) by

This-invariant is referred to as the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT since(⃝)=. Hereis a quantum group parameter[2]and can be determined by the levelof CS theory and the rankof the gauge group as.
When(i.e.) and(),
the HOMFLY–PT reduces to the Jones and Alexander polynomials, respectively. The-invariant corresponds to the Kauffman polynomial.

The Harer–Zagier (HZ) transform was first introduced in[5]where it was used as a generating function for the computation of Euler characteristics of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces, via random matrix theory[6,7]. This matrix model approach
is useful, not only for the study of Euler characteristics, but also for computing
the intersection numbers of the orbifold, which are the Gromov-Witten invariants for a point[8,9,10,11].
The HZ transform in relation to Gaussian correlators (Gaussian means) has been considered in[12].

The HZ transform has recently been applied to knot polynomials[13,14].
In this context, it amounts to a discrete version of the Laplace transform applied to the parameterin the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial,
which can be expressed as

At each monomial() in, the sum overcan be evaluated via geometric series (assuming)

Thus the evaluation of HZ amounts to the substitutioninand, hence, it transforms the HOMFLY–PT polynomial into a rational function, involving the ratio of polynomials in the parametersand.
The HZ transform is said to befactorisable, if both the numerator and denominator can be expressed as the product of monomials inof the form.

As an explicit example, consider the right handed trefoil knot, which has HOMFLY–PT polynomial

Its unnormalised version is obtained by multiplying with an overall factorand becomes. The HZ transform is obtained by applying (3)
and has the factorised form

In fact,belongs to the family of torus knots, whose all members are known to have factorised HZ transform[13]. Beyond the torus family, a hyperbolic family of pretzel knots that also enjoys this property was recently found in[14].

In the present article, we extend the results of[14]by finding further infinite families of hyperbolic knots which admit a factorisable HZ transform. As explained in Sec.2.1, such knots are related to each other by full twistsor concatenations of their braid representatives with Jucys–Murphy braid, examples of which are shown in Fig.1. The factorisability property seems to be preserved under these operations applied an indefinite amount of times and, hence, they are used to generate the infinite families. Furthermore, in Sec.2.2we consider the HZ factorisability in the case of links with more than one components.
Such knots and links are special since their HZ function can be fully determined by two sets of integers corresponding to the numerator and denominator exponents of; and a parameter, which gives a lower bound to the braid index, according to the Morton–Franks–Williams inequality (c.f. Remark2.2).
We describe how the HZ transform may give an explanation for the non-sharpness of the inequality for the exceptional cases.

In Sec.3, Theorems3.1and3.2suggest a way to recover the HOMFLY–PT and Alexander polynomials of a knot or link, given its HZ function. This is achieved by applying the inverse HZ transform, which is computed via contour integrals. As an application, we provide the compact formula (38) for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of the infinite families of knots that admit HZ factorisability, which is somewhat reminiscent of the Rosso-Jones formula for torus knots[16]. In (48) we also give a closed expression for the Alexander polynomial of the factorised cases.

Furthermore, in Sec.4.1we conjecture that HZ factorisation for knots occurs if and only if their HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials are related by(is defined in (59)),
hence providing a necessary and sufficient condition for factorisability.
This can also be reduced to a relation (76) between the Alexander and Kauffman polynomials. In fact, such relations were long known to exist for torus knots[15]. We find that this holds for an exhaustive list with up-to-12-crossings knots that admit HZ factorisability and, in Theorem4.1–which is among the central results of this article–, we prove it for the families,,and(defined in Sec.2). A similar HOMFLY–PT-Kauffman relation (82) is found in the case of links, but it is no longer in 1-1 correspondence with HZ factorisability. In Sec.4.2we further suggest that (59) is equivalent to the vanishing of the two-crosscap BPS invariantof topological string theory, which is related to link invariants via the gauge/string duality[34]. The BPS invariants for several HZ-factorisable two-component links are included in the Appendix.

In Sec.5, we investigate the homological interpretation of the factorised HZ transform. This is based on the observation that the HZ exponents for a given knot, coincide with the numberappearing in the rows of its Khovanov homology (Kh) table[17]and relate to the corresponding Euler characteristics[18,19,20,21].
In fact, according to Prop.5.1, in cases of factorisable HZ transform, the HOMFLY–PT and Jones polynomial (the latter being the graded Euler characteristic of Khovanov homology) are exactly equivalent.

A summary and discussions can be found in Sec. 6, while in a follow up paper[22], more general knots, whose HOMFLY–PT polynomial does not admit the HZ-factorisability property, shall be considered.

SECTION: 2Knots and links with factorised HZ transform

SECTION: 2.1Knots

We consider the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT polynomialof a knot as the two-parameter polynomial invariant defined in (2).
Its HZ transform (3) is said to be factorisable when it can be written in the form

whereare constants that depend onand satisfy. In fact, the denominator exponentsare fully determined by, which is the lowest power ofinand the parameter. As we shall explain below, the latter in most cases coincides with the braid index of the knot.

In the previous article[14]we verified that the factorisability property holds for the-stranded torus knots, whose exponents areand; and we also found that the pretzel family111The overline notationis used interchangeably with the more standardto indicate negative tangles., which is hyperbolic, also admits (7) with,,and.

An exhaustive list for hyperbolic knots with up to 13 crossings satisfying (7) together with their HZ parameters is the following222We used the website KnotInfo[23]for the data of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of knots with up to 13 crossings and its HZ transform was computed using the Mathematica software. Note that, although we often use Rolfsen notation to describe a knot, we sometimes refer to the mirror imageof the one originally listed in the Rolfsen table.
The HOMFLY–PT polynomials and HZ transforms of mirror knots are related byandrespectively, and hence conclusions about factorisation are not affected by this choice. For clarity, sometimes a superscriptwill be added to the Rolfsen notation indicating weather we refer to the positive or negative one (as indicated by the sign of their writhe), respectively, which are the mirror image of each other. Note that the sign of the writhe is also reflected in the sign of the exponents in the HZ transform..;;,;;;,;;;,;;;,,;;;;;;,,;;,;.;;,;.;;,;.;;,,;.;;;.

These knots
can be related to one another by two operations. The first, is by introducing a full twiston an-stranded braid representative of a knotthat satisfies (7). The resulting knot, which will be denoted asor, does not depend on the choice of minimal braid representative forbecause full twists are equivalent to Dehn twists. The second operation, is by concatenation with the Jucys–Murphy braidor equivalently (rotated by)[25,26], on some special-stranded braid representative of. Note that, unlike with the full twists, the resulting knot and its factorisability will now strongly depend on the choice of braid representative and, hence, the latter should be specified to obtain an unambiguous definition for.
Examples of such twists forare shown in Fig.1.

The relations for the knots listed above under these operations are summarised in the tables (a) and (b) of Fig.2.

The factorisability of the HZ transform seems to further be preserved after applying these operations an arbitrary number of times.
Therefore, infinite families of knots with a factorised HZ transform can be generated (in a non-unique way) by concatenating withandfor,
as we shall see in several examples below.

The family, which is
generated byfull twists onthat has braid index, is depicted in Fig.3. This family has been previously considered in[27].

For instance, atit includes the 10-crossing knot. In turn, as suggested in the table (a) of Fig.2, the knotitself can be obtained by a full twist on
a 3-stranded version of the left handed trefoilwith braid word, which can be schematically depicted as

Here vertical lines represent the strands, while solid or dashed horizontal ones represent a positive or negative crossing, respectively. Hence,and.
The HOMFLY–PT polynomial for this family can be computed recursively forby

and its HZ transform can be written in a symmetric way in terms of the number of crossingsas

i.e., in terms of,,and.

Note that for each subsequent member of the family the value ofincreases by, which is equal to the number of crossings in the full twists.
Moreover, the values of the numerator exponentsalso change in an additive way with each additional full twist.

The whole of the pretzel familycan be further generalised into,
with HZ transform333In general, it is often difficult to find simple recursive or explicit formulas for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial for families generated by full twists. However, for the first few members of the family (with no more than 45 crossings), it can be computed using the Mathematica package ”Knot Theory”. Although the HOMFLY–PT polynomial becomes increasingly complicated, the exponents in the HZ transform, which remains factorisable, show a clear pattern that follows the observation in Remark2.1. In the sequel, the HZ formulas for such families are determined in this way, by extrapolating on the pattern exhibited by their first few members. It will be an interesting future task to prove these formulas more rigorously.

Atit reduces to the familymentioned above, while atit contains the subfamily,
which includes the knotat. Further such relations can be traced in table (a) of Fig.2.

A different family can be generated byfull twistson the mirror of the pretzel family. It is denoted asand has
HZ transform

At, these are simply torus knotsand.
Note that this expression is very similar to Eq. (10) with the exponents ofrelated to(amount of full twists) being the same, while the remaining ones switch sign (c.f. footnote2).
Similarly, by applying (positive) full twists on the mirror of any of the knots satisfying (7),
different families can be generated,
but their HZ transforms will be related in a similar way as in this case.

The familycontains the torus knotsat,at,atand the hyperbolic knotat. The braid of the latter, for example,
is schematically depicted as

.

This representation is not unique, however, sincecan equivalently be obtained by a full twist on a 4-stranded trefoil, i.e. as, or alternatively as(c.f. Fig.2(a)).
The HOMFLY–PT polynomial of this family can be obtained recursively via the formula

and its HZ transform, in terms of the crossing number, reads

By increasing the number of full twists, this can be generalised further towith
HZ transform

Atmembers of this family can be expressed as the closure of the braid, or alternatively, of.

The knot, which has braid index, can be obtained by a full twist on a 4-stranded version ofin the form depicted below

.

It generates the familywith HZ transform

The knot, which has braid indexbut has the same HOMFLY–PT polynomial as, can be obtained by a full twist on a 4-stranded version ofin the form.
It generates the familywith
HZ transform

Next, we turn to families obtained by concatenation with the Jucys–Murphy’s braid. As we mentioned earlier, this will be braid word depended and hence for the resulting knotto be well defined, the former
shall be specified in each case.

The familyhas HZ transform

Note that atthis is just the pretzel family.
Atthis is a family that includesat,at,atandat(c.f. Fig.2(a)). For instance, the familyhas HZ exponents,,.
Moreover, at, the knot corresponding tocan also be obtained asand toas. The familycan alternatively be obtained via a full twiston a 4-strandedin the form

…

.

Its HOMFLY–PT polynomial has the recursive formula

At, the recursive formula becomes

but it gets much more complicated for.
For general, atthe family can also be expressed as,
within which(at)
has the same HOMFLY–PT polynomial as.
Moreover, atthis corresponds to,
within whichat(c.f. Fig.2(a)).

The family, which is generated byhas HZ transform

The familywhenhas HZ transform

When, i.e.(), the HZ forcan still be obtained from the above formula since.
The knotsandalso belong to the pretzel family(c.f. eq. (13) and Fig.2).
The knotcorresponds to an-crossing knot, which can equivalently be expressed in terms of torus knots with additional strands of the formortimes a full twist.

The familywhenhas HZ transform

When, i.e.(), we getsince.

Interestingly, the HZ transform foris not factorisable.

The familywhich has arbitrary braid indexhas HZ transform444We were only able to confirm the validity of (2.1) for.

Many more infinite families of knots satisfying (7) can be generated in a similar fashion.

Some members in the family oftwisted torus knots, which are obtained from a torus knotbyfull twists on its laststrands, also have a factorised HZ transform. Depending on the relative values ofthese contain many different kinds of knots (see e.g.[28]). For instance, they are torus knots when(or), cables of torus knots whenis a multiple of(or) and hyperbolic whenis not a multiple of(to guarantee hyperbolicity, it is also required that the number of full twists is).
An example of twisted torus knots which are hyperbolic is the family,
for which

Note that, while the particular cases() and().
Another example of twisted torus knots with factorised HZ transform is the family, a member of which is depicted in Fig.4

and whose HZ transform for oddis

For even, the numerator exponents are changed to,and. At(the factors with exponentcancel), these are just the torus knots. They can be hyperbolic only when. Note that the twisted torus knotsandhave HZ transform that only partially factorises, or in other words, admits quasi-factorisation, meaning that the numerator can be expressed as an overall factortimes a more general ()-polynomial.

SECTION: 2.2Links

To remain consistent with our conventions in (1), the normalisation factor of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial for linkswith even number of components should be multiplied by an overall minus sign555This ambiguity in the overall sign is an artifact of a discrepancy between conventions used in the literature. The fact that it is needed for links with even number of components is because of the odd parity in the powers ofandthat appear in.. That is, for a linkconsisting ofcomponents the unnormalised HOMFLY-PT polynomial refers to the quantity

The 2-stranded torus linkswith parallel relative orientation666Throughout this paper, when we refer to torus linkswe mean the links obtained as the closure of the braid, which naturally induces the parallel orientation on all components.on the 2 components have a factorisable HZ transform. A simple example
atis shown in Fig.5. This corresponds to the Hopf link, which is tabulated asin[23], where the notationdenotes the choice of orientation. For, the torus links with parallel orientation are tabulated asand.

For these torus links the HZ transform reads

The difference with the HZ function corresponding to 2-stranded torus knotsis the plus instead of minus sign that appears in the numerator. Note that in the case of the Hopf link, the opposite orientation, i.e.results in the same HOMFLY–PT polynomial and hence its HZ transform still factorises, but this is not true for.
The HZ transform is also not factorisable for torus links with higher number of strands, no matter the choice of relative orientation. For example, the HZ transform of the 3-stranded torus linkbecomes

Below, we give an exhaustive list of non-torus links with up to 11 crossings (using the notation777As for knots (c.f. footnote2), the links referred to here might, in fact, correspond to the mirror image, as compared to the one listed in[23]. Their positivity/negativity is again denoted by a superscriptand it is reflected in the signs of the HZ exponents.of[23]) that admit a factorised HZ transform in the form

;,;;;;,;;;,;;,;;,;;,;;,;;,;.
For all of the above linksand the braid index is 3, with the exception ofwhich has braid index 4. They all consist of two components. For the links,andthese are,
while for the remaining ones they are. They are all hyperbolic links, with the exception of the twisted torus links, which have vanishing hyperbolic volume (i.e. their complement does not admit a hyperbolic structure).

The family of twisted torus linkswith,
which contains,and, has HZ transform when

while the numerator exponents becomewhenand,, when. Additional full twistsjust yield. Furthermore, by concatenating withwe obtain:–;,,.–;,,.–:,,, whileis not factorisable.–.–, while for;,,.

In general, a more thorough consideration seems to be necessary in order to better understand the conditions under which concatenation with the Jucys–Murphy braid preserves factorisability or not.

The family, whilehas HZ transform

The familyhas

and with full twists the HZ becomes

The 2-component twisted torus linkswith braid index 4, has HZ transform888We were only able to confirm (34) for.

Note that the HZ transform forandforare only quasi-factorisable, while foris completely not factorasibale. Moreover,is again quasi-factorisable, whilecontains two overall factorsin the numerator.

Note that, at, all the above formulas become(c.f. proposition5.3).

The constantthat appears in the HZ transform (29), is related to the-span in the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of a knot or link.
According to theMorton-Franks-Williams (MFW) inequality[29,30], the latter
provides a lower bound of its braid index999The braid index is equal to the least number of Seifert circles in any of the knot’s projections.. Explicitly,, whereandare the lowest and highest exponents ofin the normalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial. In terms of the HZ parameter, the MFW invequality can be simply rephrased as

Although the inequality is sharp for most knots, there exist 5 exceptional cases with up tocrossings, namelyand, which all have braid index(see the braid index table 15.9 of[2]and the comments therein). The reason this occurs for the knotsand, is that the HOMFLY–PT polynomial can not distinguish them from other knots that have a lower braid index and for which the inequality is sharp. In particular,and, which hence determinesand, which are smaller than their actual braid index. Similarly, for the two-component linkwe haveand hence.

Such coincidences, may be interpreted through the HZ transform to be
a result of a cancellation between several factors of the form, which occur both in the numerator and denominator. In the case offor which the HZ is factorised, this can be clearly seen fromin (16) at, in which the factorsandcancel. Prior to this cancellationis equal to the braid index, and hence the MFW inequality is sharp.
Beyond 10-crossings, the same holds, for example, for the knotsand,
as their HOMFLY–PT polynomials are equal to the ones for101010Classifying hyperbolic knots which have the same HOMFLY–PT polynomial as a torus knot, which hence are also cases of non-exact MFW inequality, seems to be an interesting task that we aim to address in the future.and, respectively, and hence they both have. Their braid indexcoincides within (17), in which, indeed, a factor cancels at the valuesand.
Similarly, for the remaining cases which do not admit HZ factorisability, it can be understood that the HZ transform is really quasi-factorisable, but the overall factor cancels out. By considering the corresponding familiesobtained by full twists, we can deduce what those ”missing factors” are. In particular, we findfor,for,for,forandfor111111Note thatis only quasi-factorisable atand non-factorisable for.. Notwithstanding, the HOMFLY–PT polynomial itself is, in fact, oblivious to this information, and recovering it in this way through the HZ transform requires prior knowledge of the braid indexin each case.

SECTION: 3Inverse HZ transform

Although the HOMFLY–PT is a complicated polynomial for knots and links with high number of crossings, we have seen that in the several cases the HZ transform takes a remarkably simple, factorised form that can be easily extrapolated to include members of infinite families. Hence, it is important to be able to recover the HOMFLY–PT polynomial from the HZ transform and this can be achieved via the following theorem.

The HOMFLY–PT polynomialcan be obtained fromvia a contour integral around the pole atas

Alternatively, choosing a contour enclosing all the simple poles at, it can be expressed as

The way to recover the HOMFLY–PT polynomial from the HZ function is by applying the inverse HZ transform, i.e. by inverse Laplace transform. First, notice that the HZ function in (3) is a Maclaurin series with coefficients the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial, () with. The radius of convergenceof this series is given by, which givesfor a fixeds.t.. Henceis analytic in the disk.
To understand the equivalence ofwith a discrete Laplace transform we setfor some complex parameter(), with which it becomes periodicand it is analytic for. Then, from the inverse Laplace (or Mellin) transform we get. After the change of variablesthis gives the contour integral in (36) evaluated on a counterclockwise contour including only the pole of orderat, which is the only one lying in the domain of analyticity. Finally, dividing by the normalisation factorgives the normalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial. The alternative contour integral in (37) utilises the fact that the residue of a pole inside a given contour is equal to minus the sum of residues of the poles lying outside of it.
∎

As an application of the above theorem, the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of knots that admit HZ factorisability, i.e. satisfy (7), can be written in terms of the HZ parametersandandas ()

Some explicit examples follow.The two-stranded torus knotshave HZ paramers,. From the above theorem, their HOMFLY–PT polynomial can be derived as, in agreement with the Rosso–Jones formula. This can be written as a polynomial inandafter the substitutionsand.The Pretzel knotshave HZ transform (13) with parameters,,, where.
Using (38), we obtain

For the familywith, the HOMFLY–PT polynomial can be derived from (21) via the above formula
to be

The HOMFLY–PT reduces to the Jones polynomialwhen.
Therefore we deduce the following

The Jones polynomialcan be expressed as the following contour integral ofaround the double pole at,

Example:The Jones polynomial for the familycan be computed from (10) atto be

Theorem3.1holds for all, but it requires a specification for(), corresponding to the Alexander polynomial. This is because dividing bybecomes problematic in the limit.

The Alexander polynomial can be obtained fromby

in which
the integration contour at eachshould include the pole
at.

Under partial fraction decompositioncan be decomposed as

in which the functionsare polynomial inand are independent of.
By residue calculus,can be obtained fromvia contour integrals around the pole atas

These clearly are the coefficients of(which is replaced byunder HZ transform)
in the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial and hence the latter can be expressed as. The Alexander polynomialcan be obtained as the limit, which evaluates to. Using de l’Hôpital’s rule

∎

Note that the above theorems apply to knots and links with both factorised and non-factorised HZ transform.Example: The figure-8 knot with(non-factorisable),
yields via (43) and the residue theorem

This yields the usual Alexander polynomialafter replacing.

For torus knots there is a well known formula for their Alexander polynomial, which reads

which has alternating coefficients. This can be seen, for example, inandApplying theorem3.2togiven by (7), with the help of the residue formula we obtain the following closed expression for the Alexander polynomial for knots with factorised HZ transform121212Alternatively, the Alexander polynomial for factorised cases could be determined by first computing the normalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial using (38), in which the factoralways cancels, and then set.

This formula is applied to several examples below.

The Alexander polynomial for the pretzel familycan be determined from its HZ parameters,,andvia (48) to be

For the family(includingfull twists) from (10) we get

which reduces to (49) at, and atgives, with.
Atit can also be recursively determined
(for) by

Another example is, for which (14) yields

Forthe Alexander polynomial can be derived explicitly from (15) as

For the family(shown in Fig.3), from (9) we obtain

or recursively by().

It may be interesting to note that the Alexander-Conway polynomial, with, for several knotsfor which HZ factorisability holds,
can be written in terms ofandas follows

Note also that.

Furthermore, noting thatis a root of, at which the the Alexander polynomials for,,are vanishing, it may be interesting to consider evaluation of the Alexander polynomials of the remaining factorised cases at this value.
We findFor the pretzel familyfor, while it becomes equal toforand, respectively.For thefamilywhenis even, otherwise it is.The Alexander polynomialtakes the valueswhen, respectively.The Alexander polynomial for(which can be derived from
(16)) shows the same mod 3 behavior, since, at, respectively.

The Alexader polynomial of knots with factorised HZ
take the valuesor,
when evaluated at.

SECTION: 4Kauffman polynomial and HZ factorisability

The Kauffman polynomial[31]of a knot or linkcan be defined as131313The definition here differs from the original in[31]by. Our convention is such that for positive knots, the Kauffman polynomial has positive powers of, as it is the case for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial defined in (1) and hence it will allow their comparison later in this section., whereis the writhe of the diagram, whilesatisfies the skein relation

and the normalisation condition. For 2 disconnected knots holds that.
Note that although the skein relation forapplies to unoriented links, a choice of orientation is necessary to compute the writheand hence the Kauffman polynomial is orientation depended.

As it is the case for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial, it also admits a definition via Chern–Simons theory with the gauge group141414Note that the Euler characteristics for the moduli space
of Riemann surfaces[5]can be extended to Lie algebras of type(i.e.) containing symmetric and anti-symmetric terms[32].or. Such a definition is in agreement with (55) after an overall multiplication withand the substitutionsand. The resulting polynomial is referred to as the unnormalised (or unreduced) Kauffman polynomial.

SECTION: 4.1A Relation between the HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials of HZ-factorisable knots and links

There is a well known relation between the Kauffman polynomialand the Jones polynomial(with) given by[17]

Although, in general, the Kauffman polynomial contains many more terms as compared to the HOMFLY–PT polynomial, in the case of torus knots, withco-prime, there exist a relation between them. Denoting the Kauffman
and HOMFLY–PT polynomials for torus knots byand, respectively, their relation reads[2,15]

Hererefers to the Dubrovnik version of the the Kauffman polynomial,
which is obtained by substitutingand, i.e.[15].
The first and second parts, which shall be labeled as

contain the terms with even and odd powers ofand, respectively.
It can be easily verified for simple torus knots, such as, for instance, for which. The odd part is, which is divisible by. With the even part being, the r.h.s of (57) indeed yields the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of the trefoil.
Note, however that (57) does not hold for torus links, i.e. whenare not co-prime.

The above relation also does not hold for general, non-torus knots.
For instance, forthe r.h.s. of (57) becomes, which differs from its HOMFLY–PT polynomial. Similarly, the invariants of the knots,anddo not satisfy (57).

It is remarkable, however, that for, which is a hyperbolic knot but has a factorised HZ transform, the formula (57) is true. Explicitly,, while, hence yielding the correct HOMFLY–PT polynomial.

The HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials for the following families of knots(i),(ii)forand(iii), which admit a factorisable HZ transform,
satisfy

(i) For the first pretzel family(with), using (55) we find the following recursive relation for (the Dubrovnik version of) its Kauffman polynomial

Hereandwith. After some simple algebraic manipulations it can be shown that

This is the same expression as for the recursive formula of its HOMFLY–PT polynomial found in151515Note that in[14]we considered the mirror familyand hence the HOMFLY–PT polynomial ofis related to that via.[14]. That is, all the extra factors arising from the last term in the Kauffman skein relation (55), which is not present in the HOMFLY–PT skein relation (1), cancel.
Using the fact that (59) holds for the torus knotsand, the proof can be easily completed by induction.

The proof is very similar for the second pretzel family, which has Kauffman polynomial

yielding

Again, this agrees with the recursive formula for its HOMFLY–PT polynomial161616Note that this is an alternative but equivalent version of the recursive formula (12) for(after), which was expressed in terms of torus knots only.

(ii) The Kauffman polynomial of the familywith, which is the closure of the braid, can be obtained recursively by

This yields

Using,and, one can easily show that the terms on the last two lines exactly cancel and hence (66) has the same form as the recursive formula for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial in (18). Since the Theorem is valid for the knots,and, the proof can again be completed by induction.

Similarly, the family() has the recursive formula for its Kauffman polynomial

which yields

Using that,and,and after some simple algebra, one can show that the terms in the last 3 lines exactly cancel and hence (4.1) has the same form as the recursive formula for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial in (19), which only involves knots that satisfy theorem4.1. For the last 2 families the proof can be extended to include the cases with, whose recursive formulas will differ slightly from (66) and (4.1) in a similar way as they do for the two pretzel families.

(iii) For the family, obtained byfull twistson, we find

with which we get

This recursive formula is almost the same as (8) for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of, apart from an extra term in the last line. This is present due to the fact thatfor 3-stranded torus links, which are included in the summation of the first line whenever.
To redeem this, we compute

and

The latter yields

where. By further using (83) one can show that

It is then straight forward to compute.
Taking this into account and using thatfor torus knots, the recursive formula (4.1) becomes exactly equal to (8) for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of.
∎

Using the data in[23], one can further easily confirm that (59) is also satisfied by the knots,,and, which, together with the ones included in the above families, complete the list with up to 12 crossings for which the HZ transform of their HOMFLY–PT polynomial factorises.
We have also checked that some other factorised cases, such as the twisted torus knots also satisfy (59) and, in general, no exception has been found so far.
In fact, we have further confirmed that, for knots with up to 12 crossings, (59) is valid if and only if the HZ transform of their HOMFLY–PT polynomial factorises.
This motivates the following.

The HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials for a knotsatisfy (59) if and only if the HZ transform of its HOMFLY–PT polynomial admits a factorised form (7), i.e.

For torus knots, there is also a relation between the Kauffman polynomialand the Alexander-Conway polynomial, which can be derived from (57)[15].
As a consequence of Theorem4.1, since the Alexander-Conway polynomial corresponds to thelimit of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial, we have

The relation between the Alexander-Conway and Kauffman polynomials

which is true for torus knots[15], also holds for the hyperbolic families,,and.

Note that the first term in (76), which comes from, is always unity at, for all knots.
A general hyperbolic knot, such as, does not satisfy the relation (76), since the r.h.s. is, while its Alexander-Conway polynomial is.

We have further tested that this relation holds for all the remaining up-to-12-crossings knots with factorised HZ transform.
As a natural consequence of thepart of conjecture4.1, (76) should remain valid for all the hyperbolic families with factorised HZ transform. However, () does not hold when restricting to the Alexander case (), since the hyperbolic knots,andwhose HZ transform does not factorise, do satisfy (76).

To get an idea of some of the implications of conjecture4.1we consider the following.
First, note that when the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of a knot has a factorised HZ transform, it means that it is expressible in terms of HZ parameters as in (38), which is an expansion in powers ofwith-polynomial coefficients.
Alternatively, the unnormalised HOMFLY–PT polynomial of a knot171717More generally, for a link withcomponents the lowest power ofinis.can be written as an expansion in powers ofas

in which the coefficientsare polynomial in. Similarly, we can expandand. For all knots it holds that[33], which in the factorised cases can be expressed in terms of the HZ parameters as

whereis the smallest power ofsuch that.
For (59) to hold it is required thats.t., whiles.t.. For the latter to be true, anecessary (but not sufficient) conditionis that

which can happen only ifthe Kauffman polynomial has even highest power of. For alternating knots the highest power ofis equal to, whereis the number of crossings[31]. This implies that no alternating knot with even number of crossings can satisfy (59). In the light of conjecture4.1, this also becomesa necessary condition for factorisability of the HZ transform.
Indeed, the list of up-to-13-crossings hyperbolic knots with factorised HZ transform (see Sec.2) contains only non-alternating knots with even number of crossings181818Note that for odd number of crossings the only knots with factorised HZ are alternating and includeand the torus knots, which are excluded from that list. Up tothe latter are listed asin the Rolfsen table, and extend toandin[23].. The highest power ofin the Kauffman polynomial for non-alternating knots is not known in general, but for up to 10-crossing-knots it is equal to(with the only exception beingfor which it is) and hence satisfy the necessary condition (79).

The above discussion applies only to knots. However, it is also of interest to examine the relation between the HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials in the case of links, with multiple components. It is noteworthy that links may be interesting from a physics viewpoint, due to the fact that their Khovanov homology is more clearly related to the space of BPS states in M-theory[44].

The HOMFLY-PT polynomialandfor knots or links with odd number of components are always even Laurent polynomials in.
However, for links with even number of components,involves only odd powers of, and hence (59)
cannot hold.
As a consequence, while for links with odd number of components (including knots) we comparewith

when the number of components is even, we should instead comparewith

As discussed in Sec.2, all the links admitting a factorisable HZ transform known to us, have 2 components.2-component links

The HOMFLY–PT polynomial for the majority of the HZ-factorisable 2-component linkswith up to 11 crossings,
satisfy the following relation to their Kauffman polynomial191919As a reminder, compared to the data of[23], the variableof the Kauffman polynomial should be replaced by, in order to match our conventions.

in whichis the linking number of, which is obtained as a sum ofover the crossings between.

We have explicitly verified that this holds for the following links from Sec.2with,,,,,,. It also valid for the ones included in the following families.

The 2-stranded torus links with parallel orientationwith. These include,,,,. For example, for() the r.h.s. of (82) becomes.
The opposite choice of orientation, results in a HOMFLY-PT polynomialthat differs toby, but still has a factorised HZ transform. In this case
the r.h.s becomes, in agreement with.

The twisted torus linkssatisfy

where,and. For instance, for:, for:and for:.

From (82) at, we obtain thatin the case of a factorised links with two components, sinceand, which are multiplied byvanish.
For, the HOMFLY–PT polynomialand the factorbecome 1. Hence. For instance, for, which satisfies (82) with, we haveand.

However, the link, despite its factorisability, is an exception, which does not satisfy (82) since evaluation of the l.h.s. yields

This can be rewritten as, which yieldsat(). It is noteworthy that, although the HOMFLY–PT polynomial can not distinguish this link from, their Kauffman polynomialsare very different.
The reason for this link being exceptional remains mysterious and deserves further investigation. The breaking of (82) in this case, implies that a relation between the HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials for links can not serve as a criterion for factorisability.

3-component linksThe 3-stranded torus links,
although their HZ transform is not factorisable, satisfy the simple relation

as proven in (iii) of Theorem4.1.
For instance, the HZ transform of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial of, which is given in (28)
is simple but not factorisable.
Different choices of orientation
are labelled asand their HZ becomes. They have the same HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials, which relate as. This can be a bit simplified by considering.

4-component linksFor the torus link, which is the closure ofand its HZ transform does not factorse, we find

while forwe get

Thus we observe that, from 4 components, not only the HZ transform for torus links is not factorisable, but also they no longer have a simple relation between the HOMFLY–PT and Kauffman polynomials. For both of the above links it holds that, for,.

For an-component link.

SECTION: 4.2BPS invariants and HZ factorisability

There are intriguing relations between knot and link polynomials and BPS invariants of topological string theory, known as the LMOV conjecture[35,36,37]. In this context, as we shall explain below, the factorisation criterion of the HZ transform due to conjecture4.1seems to be related to the vanishing of the two-crosscap BPS invariantof a non-orientable surface.BPS invariants for knots

The unnormalised HOMFLY-PT polynomial of knots, corresponding to the-invariant in CS theory, can be expanded as

in which the coefficientsare constants. Such an expansion of both the fundamental HOMFLY–PT polynomial and its colored versions202020More generally, the integer coefficients are denoted by, where the subscriptdenotes the representation (color), usually indicated by the corresponding Young tableaux.
In the present paper, however, since we restrict only to the fundamental representation, we shall omit the additional subscript on the coefficientsfor simplicity.have been previously studied in[34,37], in relation to topological string theory.
In particular,
the coefficientsin (88)
correspond to the spectrum of BPS states of topological strings[37]. The topological string interpretations of the indicesandare the spin and thebrane charge, respectively[36].

Some properties ofcan be derived from (88). First, note that at, corresponding to the unnormalised Alexander polynomial,is always vanishing
due to the overall factorthat is included in it212121Sincecorresponds to, this is also the reason that there is no constant-term in the HZ transform[13]., and hence (88) yields

Sinceis apriori an arbitrary parameter, this implies that for each exponent

Noting that the derivativeand sinceby taking the-derivative of (88) and using (89) we find that in thelimit

Tables 1-3 below include the values offor,and.

It can be easily checked that these examples satisfy
(90) and (91).
The BPS invariantsin the case ofwere also computed in[34]and their values (up to–due to mirroring– and an overall minus sign) agree with Table 3.

The Kauffman polynomial, corresponding to the gauge group, may admit a similar expansion with a topological string interpretation,
by splitting its partition function into an orientable and an un-orientable part according to222222As conventional, the symbolis used here to denote the partition function, but it should not be confused with the HZ transform.[34].
The orientable part is described by the crosscap number, and the corresponding coefficients in the expansion, denoted as, satisfy

i.e. they have twice the value of thecoefficientsin (88).
Hence, the orientable part is solely described by the HOMFLY–PT polynomial.
The un-orientable part
corresponds to crosscap numbers. A surface withis, while with two crosscapsis the Klein bottle, which is obtained from two projective planesas[39]. The expantion for the un-orientable part can be expressed in terms of the BPS invariantsandas follows[33,38,40]

We suggest thatmay be given explicitly in terms of a combination of the HOMFLY–PT polynomialand the (Dubrovnik version of the) unnormalised Kauffman polynomial. The latter includes the overall normalisation factor(which is equal to the Kauffman polynomial of the unlink).
Explicitly,

Considering the parity of the powers ofandin the knot polynomials, this can be split into the crosscapandparts, respectively, as

and

These formulas are consistent (up to an overall minus signs)
with the values of the Kauffman LMOV invariants computed via the methods of[34],
for all the knots for which the data are available in[24](up to 8 crossings).
For instance, in the example of, the values ofobtained via (95) which are listed in Table 4, match the result in[34]

and satisfy the relationfor.
From (96),
the value ofis found to be zero for,
again in agreement with[34].
For the trefoil, the r.h.s. of (95) forbecomes, which is consistent with the result reported in[40].

According to (96), the relation (59) between the Kauffman and HOMFLY–PT polynomial of a knot is equivalent to the vanishing of the two-crosscaps BPS invariants, i.e.

In agreement with Conjecture4.1,was found to be vanishing for torus knots[41]and for the up-to-10-crossings hyperbolic knots,,,,,and[34], which are (up to 10 crossings) precisely the ones with factorised HZ transform.
In other words, from a topological point of view, there is no contribution from Klein bottles () in the cases of
factorised HZ.

For the figure eight knot, the BPS invariant, defined by (95), becomes zero forsince the l.h.s. of (95) becomes just. For, the l.h.s. of (95) becomes,
sois
non vanishing.The vanishing of the one-crosscap BPS invariantin (95), seems to also be an interesting phenomenon.
Beyond, this occurs also for the knot, which, like, has HZ denominator exponents.
Also we find for the knot, the l.h.s. ofis one,
which means, except at. The common feature of the knotsis that, in their Khovanov homology, the Euler characteristicis 1 for(for),(for) and 0 for other, as can be seen in their Khovanov tables in[17]. The Jones polynomial ofand(which have the same homology tables) is, while. These are alternating with coefficientsaccompanied withsymmetry (the latter is due to their amphichirality).

The BPS invariant for 1 crosscapis vanishing if, except for a maximum and minimum non-vanishingin the Khovanov homology tables, in which. Up to 11 crossing knots, this occurs for.

BPS invariants for two-component linksFor a 2-component link,
assuming the fundamental representation on each component232323As before, we omit the subscriptsused in[34]to label representations on each component., the BPS invariants corresponding to the orientable part, given as the coefficients in the expansion,
can be expressed in terms of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial as

whereis the linking number of, whiledenotes the link obtained fromby reversing the orientation of one of its components242424The linking numbers ofandare related by. Note that for a fixed orientation, the linking number of a linkand its mirror imageare also related by.. The expression (98) is based on[34], but we suggest that the additional factorsshould be included.
For the unorientable partwe propose

in whichcorresponds to the (Dubrovnik version of the) unnormalised
Kauffman polynomial and hence it
should be replaced by. By splitting the terms with odd or even parity,
writing these in terms of

respectively, we find

Note that the identity

holds252525The same identity applies also to some 3-component links, such as e.g., when(i.e. at) and for some choice of relative orientations., and therefore BPS invariants are independent of the orientation of link.

In the example of, which does not admit a factorisable HZ transform,
the BPS invariants can be evaluated from the above definition
and the obtained results
agree with[34]. Namely, using thatand henceand that⃝, while noting that for 2-component linksis given by (26) (i.e. it is multiplied by an overall minus sign),
from (98) we find

Note that the subtraction by the termcompletely cancels the term of order, which is always present infor two-component links.
The BPS invariant of two crosscap number, i.e., is given by (101) using thatand

The r.h.s. becomes, which is same one as in262626Note that in[34]the values forandwere accidentally swaped, as we confirmed with the authors in a private communication.[34]. Note that the terms of orderandin the first and last three terms are canceled with each other.
TheBPS invariant can be computed via (100) as

agreeing with[34], up to an overall minus sign.

Another example is the linkwith, for which. ItsBPS invariants can be computed from (98) to be

The BPS invariants for one crosscapis obtained from (100)

in which the last term cancels the term of order.

For the linkand, the BPS invariants are similarly evaluated to be

Forwithwe find

The BPS invariants of two crosscapsfor,andare computed via (101) to beThese evaluations agree (up to some overall minus signs) with the
result provided to us via a personal communication with the authors of[34].
Some further evaluations for links with factorised HZ transform are included in the Appendix.
We have confirmed thatis valid for all links that admit HZ factorisability, with the exception of, which does also not satisfy the HOMFLY–PT-Kauffman relation (82). Moreover, it is interesting that although the HZ factorisability depends on the choice of orientation (unless the linking number is), the vanishing of the two-crosscap BPS invariant is orientation independent.

SECTION: 5Homological relation between Kh and HZ

Khovanov homology (Kh) is the categorification of the Jones polynomial. It is a doubly graded theory, which is constructed in a way such that the Jones polynomial is interpreted as the
graded Euler characteristic[18,17].
In this section, we establish a connection between the factorised HZ transform of the HOMFLY–PT polynomial and Khovanov homology.
This is based on the observation that the exponents ofin the numerator and denominator of the HZ for a given knot or link, coincide with the values ofappearing in the rows of its Khovanov homology table[17,20].
In the follow-up paper[22], a possible generalisation of this connection applicable to non-factorised cases will be discussed.

A Khovanov table contains the dimensions of the non-trivial doubly graded homology groupsand can be derived
from a graphical
analysis, using the Khovanov cube, as explained in[20]. Using this information, one can build the Khovanov polynomial (the notation here
follows[20])

The graded Euler characteristic is given by. It can be thought of as a generating function since, for each, the Euler characteristicis the coefficient of the term. In other words, for a fixed row, the value ofis equal to the alternating sum overof the dimensions ofcontained in it.
The graded Euler characteristic is in fact the same as the unnormalised Jones polynomialand its normalised version can be obtained after deviding withas

KnotsBelow we present several examples of Khovanov tables for knots with factorised HZ transform, as given in272727As before (c.f. footnote2), in some cases we consider the mirror image of knots as compared to the ones presented in[17]. The difference of their Khovanov tables is a change of sign inandand hence, also, in the signature.[17]. In these tables, we add an extra column labelled as ”HZ exponents” (or just ”HZ”), indicating which numbers appear as exponents in the denominator and which in the numerator.
As a first example, we consider the right handed trefoil knot.:

Table 5: ()
for[17]

The-values(corresponding to the circled entries in table 5) and(boxed entry), coincide with the exponents in the denominator and numerator of, respectively. The entry indicated bycorresponds to the appearance ofin the integral homology table (labelled asin[17]), as we shall explain below.
Whenevercoincides with an exponent in the numerator of HZ, their contribution tois equal to, while in the denominator it is equal to. This is due to the fact that those entries appear at columns of odd
or even, respectively.

Moreover, the table can be split into two parts corresponding to the exponents in the denominator and numerator, since there are no overlapping values among them.
We say that, the Kh table in the factorised cases can be separated282828However, separability of the Kh table does not necessarily imply the factorisability of HZ transform. An example is the
knot, whose HZ can be expressed aswhich is clearly not factorisable, but its Kh table can be separated..
Moreover, for simple knots with factorisable HZ transform, most entries in the Khovanov homology tables are 1.

The Khovanov polynomial of the trefoil
becomes

Substituting, we obtain the generating function of the Euler characteristics

which reflects the above observations about the exponents ofand the signs of the coefficients.
Dividing withand further substituting, this results in the familiar Jones polynomial of the trefoil knot

When a knotis HZ-factorisable,
i.e.is of the form (7), then its graded Euler characteristic, or unnormalised Jones polynomial, can be written as

Since,
this implies that the Euler characteristicin the Khovanov homology ofis equal toorwhencoincides with an HZ exponent in the denominator or numerator, respectively.

This can be easily proven by applying Cor.3.1(excluding the normalisation factorin (41)) to the general expression of the factorised HZ transform (7). Explicitly,.
∎

Note that after dividing withto obtain the normalised Jones polynomial, the coefficients are often again just(at least for simple knots), but there are exceptions such asand).

The sum of Euler characteristicsover allis always equal to. This is due to the fact that the Jones polynomial for all knots satisfies, while the valuecomes form the normalisation factor.

In cases when it is restricted to two main diagonals, the Khovanov homology for
the factorised knots can be determined from the Jones polynomial and the signature.
Thesignatureof a knot, which is an invariant quantity defined as the difference between
the number of positive and negative eigenvalues of its Seifert matrix, can also be obtained from the Khovanov table[17]by

In the example of, from Table 5 we observe that for,, the signaturesatisfies, while for,,, and hence.

The Jones polynomial of the trefoil can alternatively be obtained
from its Khovanov table according to

which gives (112) for. As we shall see in several examples below, Eq.115is valid whenever the Kh table contains only 2 diagonal lines.

This simple Kh table structure is shared for all 2-stranded torus knots. In general, it consists of a region with the rowscorresponding to the three HZ denominator exponents, and a region withcorresponding to the single numerator exponent, with Euler characteristicsand, respectively. Between them there is a row with, at which () is inserted, that
connects the two regions via a ”-lego piece”.
This-lego structure may be related (due to parity) to
the criterion of HZ factorisation via the Kauffman polynomial in (75) and (82), and hence we now turn to describing it in more detail.

By the fundamental theory of Abelian groups, an integral homologycan be decomposed into a direct sum

where the last finite cyclic groupis the torsion part. The asteriskinserted in the Kh table 5 for the trefoil indicates the position of thetorsion for the integral homology[17], which can be evaluated from the cycles in the Kauffman state[42].
Its positionin the table is at the box located
one step down from the entry at, and a right diagonal upward step up from the entry at. These two positions are related by a knight move[43].
For factorised knots,
the torsionalmost always appears within the
knight move, at the place which shall be indicated by the asterisk in the examples below.
The entries related by the knight move, together with the asterisk, may be grouped together as, which is what we refer to as a-lego piece.

The Khovanov table of the factorised knotcan be obtained from the one for the torus knotby shifting alltoand then adding
a lego piece with thepositioned at.
Similarly, the table ofis obtained from thetable by again shifting alland adding a lego piece at the position; and the one ofby adding a lego piece atto thetable. The table ofis obtained fromwith the shift ofand the addition of two lego pieces atand.
The table ofis obtained from the table of the torus knotby inserting one lego piece at (-11,-3) and one lego piece at the position
(-15,-5).
The integral homology ofis also obtained similarly fromby adding two lego pieces.
This implies that there are successive sequences for factorised knotsobtained by adding lego pieces.
Since these knots are, in fact, members of the pretzel familyfor, and hence they are related by an addition of a (2 stranded) twist, the insertion of such lego pieces may correspond to this operation. Moreover, the sequence,andis obtained by addition of two lego pieces. The table of(braid index=3) is obtained fromby the shift of a-lego, which also adds the required additional factors in HZ.

Some further examples follow.:

Table 6:for

In this case there is an overlap of exponents at. Note, however, that due to the factorisability, the corresponding factors in the denominator and numerator cancel each other and the Euler characteristicin this rowvanishes. If we ignore such cancellations, we can still say that the Khovanov table is separable.
The Jones polynomial (109) becomes. This can also be obtained by Remark5.2with signature(or from the HZ formula via corollary3.1).

(Table 7):

Table 7:of: type (5,3,1,-1)

Its Jones polynomialcan also be obtained from Remark5.2.

Torus knot;

Table 8: () for

The signature. The Jones polynomial (109) is, which is obtained fromdivided byand with the replacement of. Remark5.2does not hold in this case, since there more thandiagonal lines in the Kh table. The entries belonging to the third diagonal are underlined (these correspond to the entries colored by red in[17]).

It is remarkable that the entries in the homological tables of torus knotshave a (roughly) reflection symmetric structure about the main diagonal. This excludes the entry of the formappearing in theorcolumn, whenor, respectively. In the latter case, this can be seen in Table 8.

Torus knot:

Table 9:of

Here the signs ofandcorrespond toand, respectively. The Jones polynomial is, which is obtained by (109) (replacing). The signature ofis. Remark5.2does not hold in this case because there are five diagonal lines in the Kh table (there are 10 underlined entries in Table 9, which lie off the main diagonals).

The configuration of entries in the last 5 rows in the Kh table of, for all odd, follows the same pattern,
which includes
one, indicated asand the entries, corresponding to denominator exponents, which are located at even values of.

Proposition5.1implies that in the factorised cases,essentially contains the same information asand hence it is equivalent to the HOMFLY–PT polynomial. Furthermore, if the Khovanov homology is restricted to the 2 main diagonals, the Khovanov table can be reconstructed byplus the signature.
Since the Alexander polynomial can be obtained fromvia Theorem3.2, this implies that for such knots the Alexander polynomial can be related to the Jones polynomial and its categorification.

Note that neither Khovanov homology nor the HOMFLY–PT polynomial are stronger to each other since the knotsandhave the same Khovanov homology but are distinguished by the HOMFLY–PT polynomial. On the other hand,while, but their signatures differ asand.

LinksIn Sec.2, we found that several links also admit a factorisable HZ and hence it is natural to also consider their relations to Khovanov homology.
An explicit example belonging to the family of 2-stranded torus links, is, for which

Table 10:of

The Euler characteristicsat eachin the Kh homology table can again be determined by the exponents of the HZ transform, but now it is equal tofor’s corresponding to both denominator and numerator exponents. This is related to the positive sign in the numerator of (117).

When a 2-component linkhas a factorised HZ transform of its HOMFLY–PT polynomial with, i.e.is of the form (27) or (29), then the graded Euler characteristic, or unnormalised Jones polynomial, can be written as

The proof is very similar to that of Proposition5.1.
∎

The Jones polynomial ofcan also be obtained by the alternating sum of(with signature)

The sum of all Euler characteristicsfor a link
withcomponents satisfies. This is the same as the value of their Jones polynomial at, which is, multiplied by a factor.
This is consistent with the sum of Euler characteristics for knots (), which, as mentioned in Remark5.1, it is always equal to.

The coefficient ofin a power series expansion of the HZ transform is the Euler characteristics corresponding to. For the 3-component link, likewhose HZ transform is given in (28), the HZ athas a power series expansion as

For the 3-component link(with braid index 5) for instance, HZ becomes

which is same as (120).

The HZ transform atfor a linkwithcomponents (), is expressed as

The coefficient is equal to the HOMFLY–PT polynomialand it has the same value as the sum of Euler characteristicsin anhomology (corresponds to the Khovanov homology).

SECTION: 6Summary and discussions

Extending the previous study[14], we found new infinite families of hyperbolic knots and links whose HOMFLY–PT polynomial has a factorised HZ transform. We prescribed methods for generating them involving full twists and the Jucys-Murphy braid. Moreover, we have derived a closed formula (38) for the HOMFLY–PT polynomial for such families, obtained via inverse HZ transform.

Furthermore, we discovered a
relation between the HZ exponents and Khovanov homology, as the former coincide with the values ofin the rows of the Khovanov table.
In fact, in the factorised cases, the HZ transform and hence the HOMFLY–PT polynomial, is equivalent to just the Jones polynomial.
In an upcoming paper[22]we shall discuss the relation between the HZ transform and Khovanov homology for more general knots that do not admit HZ factorisability.

We have proven a relation (59) between the Kauffman and HOMFLY–PT polynomials for several factorised families of knots, which also reduces to a relation (76) between the Alexander and Kauffman polynomials. The HOMFLY–PT - Kauffman relation can conjecturally be extended into a condition for factorisability of the HZ transform. We showed that it is equivalent to the vanishing of the number of two-crosscap BPS states in topological string theory.
In the case of links, a similar relation (82) to the to Kauffman polynomial
has been found which, again, seems to correspond to the vanishing of the two-crosscap BPS invariant.

The connection between the factorised HZ transform and
the vanishing of the two-crosscap BPS degeneracy in a-brane of topological strings, may be interpreted as
supersymmetry manifesting in the HZ transform, viewed as a Hilbert (Poincaré, Molien) series. The property of BPS states which we have discussed, shows a relation between knots, links and supersymmetric gauge theory, similar to the relation between the HOMPLY-PT polynomial and Wilson loops. The suggestion of the new interpretation of Khovanov homology by a time-dependent gauge theory[44]is attractive. Further investigation may provide the connection to supermatrices, which is realised in the intersection numbers of a moduli space[39,45,46,47].

The authors have no competing interest to disclose.

Acknowledgements:We are grateful to Andrew Lobb for several useful discussions
and we thank Michael Willis for pointing out the Jucys–Murphy braid to us. We also thank Alexei and Andrey Morozov for providing us with their knot data tables.
We acknowledge Dror Bar-Natan for his several suggestive lectures, including the one at the University of Tokyo-OIST Symposium in September 2023. We also thank Stavros Garoufalidis for his suggestion of several computer softwares for knot invariants. We are grateful to Reiko Toriumi and her unit members, especially Cihan Pazarbaşı, for constructive feedback and for assisting with coding.
This work is supported by the funding of OIST, and by JSPS Kakenhi-19H01813.

Appendix: BPS invariants for links

The BPS invariants were introduced in Sec.4.2. Here we list the results obtained via (98) and (100)-(101) for the links that admit a factorisable HZ transform. In all cases, with the only exception being, we find.;

;

From the above two cases and also from the results forandgiven in (106) and below, we can observe that the torus linksfollow the pattern shown below, in which the sign of non-zero entries is indicated.

;

;

;

;

;

:g \Q024605-1515-515-2020-521- 88- 130-110

;

;

;

Observe that the BPS invariants for the family(c.f.above andin Sec.4.2) again follow a certain pattern. This involves an alternating sign in each column and the fixed entries oforat the bottom left corner forand, respectively.;

SECTION: References