SECTION: Characterizing and Transforming DAGs within the-LCA Framework

We explore the connections between clusters and least common ancestors (LCAs) in directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs), focusing on DAGs with unique LCAs for specific subsets of their leaves.
These DAGs are important in modeling phylogenetic networks that account for reticulate
processes or horizontal gene transfer. Phylogenetic DAGs inferred from genomic data are often
complex, obscuring evolutionary insights, especially when vertices lack support as LCAs for any
subset of taxa. To address this, we focus on-lca-relevant DAGs, where each vertex
serves as the unique LCA for a subsetof leaves of specific size. We
characterize DAGs with the so-called-lca-property and establish their close
relationship to pre--ary and-ary set systems.
Moreover, we build upon recently established results that use a simple operator, enabling the transformation of
arbitrary DAGs into-lca-relevant DAGs. This process reduces
unnecessary complexity while preserving the key structural properties of the original DAG.
The setconsists of all clusters in a DAG, where clusters correspond to the
descendant leaves of vertices. While in some caseswhen
transforminginto an-lca-relevant DAG, it often happens that certain clusters indo not
appear as clusters in. To understand this phenomenon in detail, we characterize the subset
of clusters inthat remain infor DAGswith the-lca-property. Furthermore, we show that the setof vertices required to
transformintois uniquely determined for such DAGs. This, in turn, allows
us to show that the transformed DAGis always a tree or a galled-tree wheneverrepresents the clustering system of a tree or galled-tree andhas the-lca-property. In the latter casealways holds.

Keywords:Regular DAGs; Hasse Diagram; Phylogenetic Network; Cluster; Hierarchy; Galled-tree; I-ary set systems

SECTION: 1Introduction

Rooted networks and, more generally, directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), play a crucial role in
mathematical phylogenetics for modeling complex evolutionary relationships that traditional rooted
trees cannot fully capture[8,10,9]. However, DAGs and networks
inferred from genomic data are often highly complex and tangled, frequently containing redundant
information[3,4]. Consequently, several methods have been developed to
simplify DAGs or networks in various ways while preserving their most significant features to
highlight a “trend of evolution”[5,4,7,11].

In this work, we build upon the ideas introduced in[11].
Letbe a DAG, and letdenote the set of leaves (also known as sinks) in. A least common ancestor
(LCA) of a subsetis a vertexthat is an ancestor of alland has no
descendant that also satisfies this property. LCA vertices represent ancestral relationships with
clear phylogenetic signals, while non-LCA vertices lack this direct relevance to the observed ancestral
relationships in the data and may, therefore, be considered less relevant in an evolutionary
context.
A DAGis--relevant if every vertex is the unique LCA of some set of leaveswith size. As shown in[11], every DAGcan be transformed into
an--relevant DAG using a simple operatorthat acts on the vertices and
edges of. For a given subsetof non-leaf vertices inthat preventfrom being--relevant, the transformed DAG, written as, preserves the
essential structural properties of. However, setssuch thatis--relevant are, in general, not uniquely determined. Nevertheless, for such
sets,contains only clusters that are part of. More precisely,denotes the set of all clusters in, where clusters correspond to the descendant
leaves of vertices and it always holds that.
Thus, for different setsandthat makeand--relevant, we may obtain different setsand, both being subsets of. It is therefore of interest
to understand which types of clusters lie inand which do not. Moreover, what is the minimum sized setthat ensures thatis--relevant? As these questions cannot be easily answered for general DAGs, we
focus on addressing it for DAGs with the--property, i.e., DAGs for which a
unique least common ancestor exists for all subsetsof size. As we shall see, in this case, the setensuring thatis--relevant is uniquely determined and there is a close connection between the
remaining clusters inand so-called-ary set systems.
This, in particular, generalizes results established for binary or-ary clustering systems, as
established in[2,13].
We finally show that for DAGswith the--property, for whichrepresents the clustering system of a rooted tree or galled-tree, it always holds that, that is, although many vertices are “removed” from, the clusters inremain intact in. Moreover, in the latter case,is always the unique rooted tree or galled-treewith clustering system.

SECTION: 2Basics

SECTION: Sets and set systems.

All sets considered here are assumed to be finite. Aset system(on)is a collection of subsets of.
For, we writefor the set system comprising all
subsetsofwithelements. We putto denote
the powerset of.
A set systemonisgroundediffor alland, whileis aclustering systemif it is grounded
and satisfies.
Two setsandoverlapif.

SECTION: Directed Graphs.

We considerdirected graphswith nonempty vertex setand edge set. For directed graphsand, anisomorphism betweenandis a bijective mapsuch thatif and only if.
If such a map exist, thenandareisomorphic, in symbols.

A directed graphisphylogeneticif it does not contain a vertexsuch thatand. i.e.,
a vertex with only one outgoing edge and at most one incoming edge.

Aweak-pathhas an ordered vertex setand the edges inare precisely of one of the formor,.
A directed graphisweakly connected(or simplyconnected) if there exists a weak-path between any pair of verticesand.
A directed graphisbiconnectedif the removal of any vertex and its incident edges fromyields a connected graph.
If all edges inare precisely of the formfor each, thenis calleddirected.
A directed path to which the edgehas been added is adirected cycle. Adirected acyclic graph (DAG)is a DAG that does not contain directed cycles.

We can associate a partial orderwithon the vertex set, defined byif and only if there is a directed-path. In
this case, we say thatis anancestorofandis adescendantof. Ifand, we write. If, thenis aparentofandachildof.
Two verticesare-incomparableif neithernoris true. We denote bythe-minimal vertices of, and we callaleafof.
If, thenis aDAG on.
A vertexof a DAGthat is-maximal is called aroot, and the set of roots ofis denoted by.
Note thatandfor all DAGs[11].
A(rooted) networkis a DAG for which, i.e.,has a unique root. A(rooted) treeis a network that does not contain vertices
with.

For every vertexin a DAG, the set of its descendant leavesis aclusterof. We writefor the set
of all clusters in. Note thatis a grounded set system onfor every DAG[11]. Moreover,is a clustering system for every network;
cf.[6, Lemma 14].

An edgein a DAGis ashortcutif there is a vertexsuch that.
A DAG without shortcuts isshortcut-free. We denote withthe DAG obtained fromby removing all
shortcuts. For later reference, we provide

Letbe a DAG onandbe a shortcut in. Then, for all, it holds
thatif and only ifand, for all, it holds that.
In particular,is uniquely determined for all DAGs.

For a given a DAGand a subset, a vertexis acommon
ancestor ofifis ancestor of every vertex in. Moreover,is aleast common
ancestor(LCA) ofifis a-minimal vertex that is an ancestor of all vertices in. The setcomprises all LCAs ofin.
We will, in particular, be interested in situationsholds for certain subsets. For simplicity, we will writein case thatand say thatis well-defined; otherwise, we leaveundefined.

For later reference, we provide a connection between clusters ands.

Letbe a DAG on,, and
supposeis well-defined. Then the following is satisfied:

for allwith.

is the unique inclusion-minimal cluster incontaining.

Moreover, if, thenfor all.

Lemma2.2shows that if two vertices are-comparable, then their respective clusters are comparable with respect to inclusion.
The following property ensures the converse, namely,-comparability
of verticesandbased on subset-relations between the underlying clustersand.

A DAGhas the path-cluster-comparability (PCC) property if it satisfies, for all:andare-comparable if and only ifor.

As we shall see soon,
for every grounded set systemthere is a
DAGwiththat satisfies (PCC).
This result builds on the concepts of Hasse diagrams and regular DAGs.

TheHasse diagramof a set systemis the
DAG with vertex setand directed edges fromtoif (i)and (ii) there is nowith. We
note thatis also known as thecover digraphof[1,12]. A DAGisregularif the mapdefined byis an isomorphism betweenand[1].

In general, we are interested in DAGswith certain properties and that satisfyfor a given grounded set system. Structural properties
ofare, in this context, often helpful. However,holds as the leaves ofare labeled with the inclusion-minimal elements in, i.e., as sets. To circumvent
this, we writefor the directed graph that is obtained fromby relabeling all verticesinby. Thus,
forit holds thatprovided thatis a grounded set system on.

For every set system, the directed graphis a shortcut-free
DAG that satisfies (PCC).
Moreover, ifis grounded, thenis regular and phylogenetic.

SECTION: The-Operator and--RelDAGs.

Letbe a DAG onandbe a set of integers.
A vertexis an-vertexiffor some.
Moreover,is--relevant(in short--Rel) if all vertices inare-vertices.

As an example, consider the DAGin Figure1(left), where
the vertexis not an-vertex for any set of integerswhile vertexis a-and a-vertex but not a-vertex
for any. Hence, the vertexis a-vertex for any setthat containsor. Due to the vertex,is not--Relfor any set.
In contrast, the DAG in Figure1(right)
is--Relfor anywith.
Note that any leafinis a-but not a-vertex
for any. The latter is, in particular, true for any DAG
since all DAGs have at least one leaf. Thus, there exist no DAG that is--Relfor anywith.
To address this issue, we use

For any DAGconsidered here, the setdenotes a subset ofthat satisfies.

For every--RelDAG, the DAGis regular.

Not all DAGs are--Rel(cf. Figure1). As shown in[11],
it is possible to “transform” a non---RelDAGinto an--RelDAGwhile preserving essential structural
properties of the original DAGusing the following-operator.

Letbe a DAG and. Thenis the
directed graph with vertex setand edgesprecisely if,and, or ifand.
For a non-empty subset, define.

In simple words, the directed graphis obtained fromby removingand its incident edges
and connecting each parentofwith each childof. In caseis a leaf or a root,and its incident
edges are just deleted. As shown next, the operatorcan be used to transform any DAG into an--Relversion while preserving key structural properties of the original DAG.

Letbe a DAG onandbe a non-empty subset of
vertices that are not-vertices in.
Then,is a DAG onthat satisfies

, meaning no new clusters are introduced.

remains a DAG on, meaning the leaves ofremain the same as in.

, meaning no new vertices are introduced.

preserves the ancestor relationship, i.e.,if and only iffor all.

is--preserving, i.e.,for allfor whichis well-defined.

In particular,for all.
Moreover, ifcontains every vertex ofthat is not an-vertex of, thenis--Rel.

Hence, the-operator preserves essential structural features (S0) – (S4) of.
Moreover, ifis--Rel, then Proposition2.7implies thatis regular.
Thus,where, by (S0),holds.
In other words, “removal” of all non--vertices via the-operator fromresults always in a DAGthat is the
isomorphic to the Hasse diagram of a subset of. This raises the question of
how the set systemsandare
related.
Sincefor any setconsisting of non--vertices in,
it is of particular interest to understand which clusters are contained
in, if there are any. As an example see Figure1for the caseand Figure3for the case.
We will answer this question for
DAGs having the so-called-lca property
in the next section. Before, we provide the following useful lemma.

Letbe a DAG on, the edgebe a shortcut inand.
Then,satisfies (S0) – (S4).
Ifis--Rel, thenis--Rel.

Letbe a DAG onandbe shortcut in. Put.
By Lemma2.1and since,satisfies (S0) – (S3) and, even more,for all.
To see that (S4) is satisfied,
assume thatis well-defined for some.
In particular,is the unique-minimal vertex with
the property that. Sinceis-preserving andfor allit follows thatis the unique-minimal vertex
with the property that. Hence,.
It is now a direct consequence of (S4) that,
ifis--Rel, thenis--Rel.
∎

SECTION: 3-ary Set Systems and DAGs with--Property.

In the following, we consider a generalization of so-called lca-networks introduced in[6]and-lca-DAGs introduced in[13].

A DAGonhas the--propertyifis well-defined for all.

Note that there is no loss of generality assuming thatin the definition of the--property, sinceis well-defined for every leaf.
DAGs or networkswith--property are known as-lca-DAGs and, if additionally, thenis an lca-DAG[13].

A simple structural property of DAGs with--property is as follows.

Every DAGwith the--property for someis connected.

Letbe a DAG onwith the--property for somesuch that.
Assume, for contradiction, thatis not connected. In this case, there are two
leavesfor which there is no weak-path. Hence, there is no
common ancestor of. This, in particular, remains true for any subsetthat containsandin which caseis not well-defined; a contradiction.
∎

The requirement thatcannot be omitted from Lemma3.2.
To see this, consider the DAGwhich has the--property
but it is not connected.
We now show that the--property is preserved under the-operator.

Letbe a DAG with the--property andthe set of all vertices that are not-vertices of. Thenhas the--property.

Sincehas the--property,is well-defined for each. By
Theorem2.9,satisfies (S4) and, therefore,is well-defined for each. Consequently,has the--property.
∎

We now examine how the structural properties of a DAGthat are--Relor possess the--property relate to the properties of the underlying set system.
To this end, we need the following definition.

A set systemonispre--aryif,
for all, there is a unique inclusion-minimal elementsuch that.
A pre--ary set systemonis called-aryif allsatisfy
property

there is somesuch thatis the unique inclusion-minimal element inwith.

A pre--ary, resp.,-ary set system is known aspre-binary, resp.,binaryset system[2]. Moreover, pre--ary and-ary set systems
have been studied in[13].

First note that in a DAG with--property, Lemma2.2(ii) implies thatis the unique
inclusion-minimal cluster incontainingfor every. Henceis pre--ary.

For every DAGwith--property, the set systemis pre--ary.

The converse of Observation3.5is, in general, not satisfied as
shown by the DAGin Figure1.
In this example, the clustering systemis pre--ary
butdoes not have the--property since.
Note also that--Reldoes, in general, not imply the--property or thatis pre--ary, see Figure1.
In this example, the networkis--Rel. However, sinceis not
well-defined,does not have the--property. Moreover, both clustersandinare inclusion-minimal clusters containingand, thus,is not pre--ary.
Nevertheless, we obtain the following result which generalizes[13, Prop. 3.6].

Letbe a DAG that satisfies (PCC).
Then,has the--property if and only ifis pre--ary.

Theonly if-direction holds by Observation3.5.
Suppose now thatis a DAG onthat satisfies (PCC) and
such thatis pre--ary. Let.
We show thatis well-defined.
Sinceis pre--ary,
there is a unique inclusion-minimal elementsuch that. Thus,is a common ancestor ofwhich, in particular, implies that. Assume, for contradiction, thatand let. Sinceis
the unique inclusion-minimal element inthat contains,andmust hold.
Hence,.
Since bothandare-minimal ancestors of the vertices in,
neithernorcan hold.
Sincesatisfies (PCC), neithernorcan hold. This together withimplies thatandmust overlap
and, in particular,and.
This and the fact thatsatisfies (PCC) implies thatandare-comparable.
If, however,, then(cf. Lemma2.2).
Thus,and, by similar arguments,must hold.
This, however, contradicts the fact thatandare-minimal ancestors of the vertices in.
Consequently,must hold andsatisfies the--property.
∎

We now provide a characterization of grounded pre--ary set systems in terms
of the DAGs from which they derive, which generalizes[13, Thm. 3.7].

A set systemis pre--ary and a grounded set system onif and only if there is a DAGonwith--property and.

Suppose thatis a pre--ary and grounded set system on.
Consider the DAG.
By definition,is a DAG onand.
By Lemma2.4,satisfies (PCC).
By Theorem3.6,has the--property.
Conversely, suppose thatis a DAG onwith--property and.
Clearly,is thus a grounded set system on.
By Observation3.5,is pre--ary.
∎

Ifis an--RelDAG with the--property, thenis an-ary set system.

Letbe an--RelDAG onwith--property. By Obs.3.5,is pre--ary. To show thatis-ary, let. Sinceis the set of clusterswith, it follows that there is a vertexwith. Moreover, sinceis--Rel, there is somesuch that. By Lemma2.2(i),
for allwithit holds thatan
thus,(cf. Lemma2.2). Henceis the
unique inclusion-minimal cluster inthat contains, i.e.,satisfies
(-). Thus,is-ary.
∎

The following result extends Theorem3.7, characterizing the types of DAGs
that give rise to grounded and-ary set systems.

A set systemonis-ary and grounded if and only if there is an--RelDAGonwith the--property such that.

Suppose thatis an-ary and grounded set system on.
Consider the DAG.
By definition,is a DAG onand.
By Lemma2.4,satisfies (PCC).
Sinceis-ary it is, in particular, pre--ary and Theorem3.6thus imply thathas the--property. It remains to show thatis--Rel. To this end, letbe a vertex ofand put. Sinceandis-ary, there exist somesuch thatis the unique inclusion-minimal set incontaining.
Sincehas the--property,is well-defined and it holds, by
Lemma2.2, that. Note that by definition of, there is
no vertexinsuch that. By the latter two arguments, we can thus
conclude thatfor, that is,is--Rel.

Conversely, suppose thatis a--RelDAG with the--property such that.
By Lemma3.8,is-ary.
∎

The following subset of clusters plays an essential role in results that follow.

For a given set systemon, letdenote the subset ofthat contains each
clusterthat satisfies (-).

We emphasize thatneed not be pre--ary and, consequently, not-ary.
For example, consider the clustering systemon. Note thatof the DAGas shown in Figure1(right). Here,.
However,is not pre--ary, as bothandare inclusion-minimal sets incontaining.
As we will show next, this situation changes whenfor
some DAGwith the--property.

Letbe a DAG onwith--property andbe the set of all vertices that are not-vertices in.
Then,is an-ary set system.

Letbe a DAG onwith--property andbe the set of all vertices that are not-vertices in. Sincehas the--property, Observation3.5implies thatis pre--ary.

We show that. To this end, let first. Thus,satisfies (-) and hence, there is somesuch thatis the unique inclusion-minimal cluster inthat contains.
Sincehas the--property,exists and thus,is an-vertex and
therefore, not an element of. By Lemma2.2(ii), it holds that.
This together withand Theorem2.9implies that. Hence,.
Now let. Hence, there is some vertexinsuch that. By Theorem2.9,. Since,is an-vertex in, i.e., there is somesuch that. This together with Lemma2.2(ii) implies thatis the unique inclusion-minimal cluster inthat contains.
Therefore,. Hence,.

By Theorem2.9and Lemma3.3,has the--property and is--Rel. This allows us to apply Lemma3.8and to conclude thatis-ary.
∎

We note thatis, in general, not the unique inclusion-maximal-ary subset of. By way of example, considerwith withand. Hence,.
Although,has the--property,
there is no elementsuch that
the clusteris the unique inclusion-minimal cluster that contains.
Hence,does not satisfy (-). In particular,is-ary. In contrast, however,is another
subset ofthat is inclusion-maximal w.r.t. the property
of being-ary.
Nevertheless, as shall see next, the setof vertices used to transform
a DAGwith the--property into an--RelDAGthat satisfies (S0) – (S4) is uniquely determined.

Letbe a DAG onwith the--property andthe set of all vertices that are not-vertices in. Then

In particular,andare--Relregular DAGs onwith the--property
that satisfies (S0) – (S4) and for which the set systemis-ary. Moreover,is the unique and, therefore, smallest subset ofsuch thatas well asis-Reland
satisfies (S0) – (S4) w.r.t..

Letbe a DAG onwith the--property andthe set of all vertices that are not-vertices in. By Theorem2.9and Lemma3.3,is an--RelDAG onthat
satisfies (S0) – (S4) and that has the--property. Lemma3.11implies thatis-ary.

Consider now.
By Lemma2.1,is uniquely determined and. Thus,is-ary.
Proposition2.7impliesBy Lemma3.11,and
it follows that. Finally, repeated application of
Lemma2.10together with the fact thatis uniquely determined
shows thatsatisfies (S0) – (S4).

We continue with showing thatis the unique subset ofsuch thatis--Reland satisfies (S0) – (S4). Letbe some subset ofsuch thatis--Reland satisfies (S0) – (S4). Sincehas the--property,is well-defined for all.
This together with the fact thatandsatisfy (S4) implies that

In particular, this implies thatandhave the--property. Furthermore, sinceis--Rel, there is for each vertexofsomesuch that.
The latter two arguments imply that.
Analogously,. The latter two equalities together with
Equation (1) implyand consequently,. Analogous arguments show thatis the
unique subset ofsuch thatis--Reland satisfies (S0) – (S4).
∎

We note that the converse of the first statement in Theorem3.12is, in general,
not satisfied, i.e., there are DAGsthat satisfybut that do not have the--property, see Figure2for an illustrative example.
Moreover, the uniqueness of the setrequired to transform a DAGwith the--property into an-RelDAGsatisfying (S0) – (S4) is, in general, not
guaranteed for arbitrary DAGs (cf. e.g.[11, Fig. 6]).

SECTION: 4DAGs with tree-like and galled-tree-like clustering systems.

In what follows, we aim to determine the structure offor DAGswith clustering systemthat satisfies one or more of the following properties.
A clustering system istree-likeif it does not contain any overlapping elements.
Tree-like clustering systems are also known as hierarchies.
A set system satisfies(N3O)if it does not contain three pairwise overlapping elements
and a DAGis an(N3O)-DAGifsatisfy (N3O).
A set systemsatisfies property(L)iffor allwhereoverlaps bothand.
A set systemisclosedifandimpliesfor all.
A networkis agalled-treeif each maximal biconnected subgraphinis either a single vertex, an edge oris composed of exactly
two directed-paths that only haveandin common[6].
A clustering systemisgalled-tree-likeifis closed and satisfies (L) and (N3O).
Note thatcan be galled-tree-like or tree-like, althoughis “far away” from being a galled-tree or tree, see
Figure3for an illustrative example.

The following theorem, resp., lemma summarizes some results from[12, Sec. 3.5]and[6, Thm. 11], resp.,[11, Cor. 4.11 & L. 7.9].

is a clustering system of a tree
if and only ifis tree-like.
In this case,is a tree.
Moreover,is a
clustering system of a galled-tree if and
only ifis galled-tree-like.
In this case,is a galled-tree.

For every grounded set system,
there is a phylogenetic--RelDAGwith.
Moreover, in an (N3O)-DAG,
each non-leaf vertexis a-vertex for someif and only ifis an-vertex for every.

As a direct consequence of Lemma4.2, we obtain

For every grounded set systemthat satisfies (N3O), there exists an (N3O)-DAGwithand such that each
non-leaf vertexis an-vertex for every.

In the following, we call a DAGnon-trivial, if there is somewith.
Moreover, put, i.e.,is the second smallest size of a cluster in.

Ifis a non-trivial (N3O)-DAG andis a set such thatfor some integerwith, then.

Letbe a non-trivial (N3O)-DAG on. Sinceis non-trivial, we have.
Hence, there is some integerwith. Suppose thatcontains.
Putand note thatis grounded.

By Corollary4.3there exist a DAGwithand
such that each non-leaf vertexofis an-vertex for every.
To show thatholds, observe that, by construction,. Thus, it remains to show that.
To this end,
let. Since, there is a vertexwith. Ifis a leaf, thenandimplies that. Suppose thatis not a leaf.
As ensured by Corollary4.3, this vertexis a
is an-vertex for every. By
assumption,.
The latter two arguments imply that there is somesuch that. By Lemma2.2(ii),is the unique inclusion-minimal cluster
ofcontaining. By definition,.
In summary,.
∎

Letbe a non-trivial DAG with--property wherecontains an integerwith
with. Moreover, letbe the set of all vertices that are not-vertices in.
Ifis tree-like, thenis a phylogenetic treethat satisfies.
Ifis galled-tree-like, thenis a phylogenetic galled-treethat satisfies.

Lemma4.4implies.
This together with Theorem3.12implies that.
Sinceis grounded for every DAG, Lemma2.4implies thatis phylogenetic.
The latter arguments together with
Theorem4.1imply thatis a phylogenetic treewith clustering systemifis tree-like
and thatis a phylogenetic galled-treewith clustering systemifis galled-tree-like.
∎

SECTION: References