SECTION: Generalizing subdiffusive Black-Scholes model by variable exponent: Model transformation and numerical approximation

This work generalizes the subdiffusive Black-Scholes model by introducing the variable exponent in order to provide adequate descriptions for the option pricing, where the variable exponent may account for the variation of the memory property. In addition to standard nonlinear-to-linear transformation, we apply a further spatial-temporal transformation to convert the model to a more tractable form in order to circumvent the difficulties caused by the “non-positive, non-monotonic” variable-exponent memory kernel. An interesting phenomenon is that the spatial transformation not only eliminates the advection term but naturally turns the original noncoercive spatial operator into a coercive one due to the specific structure of the Black-Scholes model, which thus avoids imposing constraints on coefficients. Then we perform numerical analysis for both the semi-discrete and fully discrete schemes to support numerical simulation. Numerical experiments are carried out to substantiate the theoretical results.

SECTION: 1Introduction

The Black-Scholes equation is a classical model for option pricing, which takes the form as[3]

whereis the price of the option,is the risk-free rate andis the volatility. There exist extensive investigations for this model, see e.g.[4]and the references therein.
Despite its wide and successful applications, it is shown that it fails to characterize the significant movements or jumps over small time
steps in a financial market[5].
A potential way to resolve this issue is to replace the integer-order derivativein (1.1) by the fractional derivativewith[10]

and some progresses on the resulting subdiffusive Black-Scholes model have been reached in the past few decades[6,7,8,9,11,12,16,17,18,19,22,23].
Nevertheless, a constant exponent may not suffice to accommodate the variation of the memory property caused by, e.g. the uncertainties or fluctuations in the financial market. A possible remedy is to introduce the variable exponent. In[13], a variable-exponent fractional option pricing model is applied to accommodate various phenomena in financial activities such as the seasonal changes and temporary crises, and the effectiveness of the variable-exponent model has been demonstrated based on the real option price data. Thus, we consider the following subdiffusive Black-Scholes model with variable exponentand the expiry

Here,,are given data andwithis the variable-exponent fractional differential operator[14]

As the exact solutions of model (1.3) are in general not available, it is necessary to study numerical methods. Extensive numerical results for model (1.3) (or its variant (2.6) by standard logarithmic transformation) withfor some constanthave been obtained, while there are rare studies for the variable-exponent case. A main difficulty is that the variable-exponent memory kernel is non-positive and non-monotonic such that conventional numerical analysis methods do not apply. In a recent work[24], a relevant variable-exponent fractional Black-Scholes model is considered, where an additional termis included in (1.3). Due to this additional leading term, the impact of the variable exponent is significantly weakened such that the numerical analysis could be performed.

For model (1.3) (or its variant (2.6)) where the variable-exponent term serves as the leading term, one could apply the convolution method developed in[25]to convert the original model to a more tractable form. Nevertheless, the convolution method could lead to the coupling between spatial operators and the temporal convolution such that the advection term in (2.6) may cause difficulties in numerical analysis. Thus, a further spatial transformation could be employed for (2.6) to eliminate the advection term, cf. the transformed equation (2.7). In general, this method changes the spatial coefficients such that some constraints on these coefficients should be imposed to ensure the coercivity of the spatial operators. However, an interesting phenomenon is that the spatial operator in the transformed equation (2.7) naturally keeps coercive due to the specific structure of (2.6), even though the spatial operator in (2.6) may not be coercive. We thus combine this and the convolution method to finally obtain a numerically feasible scheme (2.15)–(2.16).

We are now in the position to consider numerical approximation to the transformed model (2.15)–(2.16). The piecewise linear interpolation approximation is used to discretize the convolutions, which results in a time-discrete scheme. Then the finite element method is applied in space to construct the fully discrete scheme. We derive error estimates for both schemes and perform numerical experiments to substantiate the theoretical findings.

The rest of the work is organized as follows: Section2presents the model transformation, which reduces the original model into a more tractable form. Then, Section3establishes a time-discrete scheme and analyzes its numerical stability and error estimate. In Section4, a fully discrete finite element scheme is constructed and analyzed. Section5provides some numerical results to validate our theoretical results. Finally, conclusions are given in Section6.

SECTION: 2Model transformation

SECTION: 2.1Nonlinear-to-linear transformation

We follow the standard method, see e.g.[23,24], to convert the nonlinear model (1.3) to a linear version.
By the variable substitutionwe obtain from (1.4) that

Therefore, if we employ the transformationand accordingly define, the subdiffusive Black-Scholes model (1.3) could be transformed into the following form

where,,,,andis defined by

Define

such that (2.3) could be reformulated via the symbol of convolution

wheredenotes the convolution in time defined as

Then a direct calculation in (2.4) leads to

Furthermore, by the homogenization technique, which replacesin (2.2) by

one could reduce (2.2) to its homogeneous boundary-value analogue with an additional right-hand side term. Therefore, without loss of generality, we invoke this and (2.5) to consider the following problem

SECTION: 2.2Further spatial-temporal transformation

We intend to perform a further spatial-temporal transformation to achieve the following goals:

Convert the variable-exponent factor from the leading term to a low-order term to resolve the difficulties caused by the variable-exponent kernel;

Eliminate the advection term to facilitate the error estimate.

First, we let

Then, we use the technique of[21]to transform problem (2.6) into

where

As, the spatial operator is coercive for any choice of the parametersdue to the specific structure of the Black-Scholes model, which significantly facilitates the numerical computation and analysis. Note that this phenomenon still occurs if we replace theby standard first-order time derivative, which implies its generality.

According to equation (2.5) and the transformed technique in[25], we perform the following convolution with equation (2.7)

thus we further calculate that

where,and the function (see[25])

in which. Hence, takinginto (2.11) yields

Then we defineto obtain

where.

SECTION: 2.3Assumptions

For a positive integer, a real numberand an interval, letbe the Sobolev space of functions with weak derivatives up to orderin, whererefers to the space ofth Lebesgue integrable functions on. Letandbe its subspace with the zero boundary conditions up to order. For a Banach space, letbe the space of functions inwith respect to. All spaces are equipped with the standard norms[1].
We setfor brevity ifrepresents a spatial interval, and drop the notationin the spaces and norms ifrepresents a spatial interval, e.g. we denote.

Throughout this work, we consider the smooth variable exponent, i.e., we assume thatforand. Furthermore, we useto denote a generic positive constant that may assume different values at different occurrences.

Following the regularity results of[25, Theorems 4.2-4.3], the solutions to the model (2.15)-(2.16) satisfy the following estimates under sufficiently regular data

which implies

Finally, we impose the conditionthroughout the work. It has been demonstrated in[26, Section 3.1]that this constraint can be arbitrarily weak. Specifically, for any smooth function, one could construct a sequence of smooth functionssatisfyingsuch thatas.

If, we haveforand.

From (2.12), we havesuch thatfor. To bound, we differentiate (2.12) to get

Since, it remains to boundand. First, we discuss the estimate of. By[2], we have

which implies

Noting thatas, thus we can differentiate (2.19) to obtain that

If, we have, which implies that. If, we get

thus we have

Then we yieldwith. We finish the proof of the lemma.
∎

SECTION: 3Time-discrete scheme

In this section, our aim is to establish a temporal semi-discrete scheme for the problem (2.15)-(2.16) using a quadrature rule to approximate the convolution terms and give a theoretical analysis of the semi-discrete scheme. For simplicity, we will drop the spatial variablein the function, e.g. we denoteas.

SECTION: 3.1Establishment of time-discrete scheme

Given a positive integer, we discretize the temporal intervalinto-subintervals such that the time step sizeand, with. Next, we consider the transformed equation (2.15) at the point, for,

In order to discretize the nonlocal terms in (3.1), we introduce the following piecewise linear interpolating to obtain

in which,

and from[15]it follows that

with the notations

Accordingly, we substitute (3.2)-(3.4) into (3.1) to yield withand,

where. Following this, by omitting the truncation errorsand replacingwith its numerical approximation, we achieve the following time-discrete scheme

SECTION: 3.2Analysis of time-discrete scheme

Next, we give the stability and convergence of the time-discrete scheme (3.13)-(3.14) by means of energy argument. First we prove stability results for the time semi-discrete scheme.

Letbe the solution of (2.6), andis the numerical approximation of. Assume that Lemma2.1holds, then

where the normdefined in (3.18).

We take the inner product of (3.13) withand sum forfromto, then

Since the kernelis positive definite with, we have

and

see[15]. Then, we utilize the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, (3.16), (3.17) and Young’s inequality to yield

By defining a new norm

then we have

where we use the fact that, see (3.5) and Lemma2.1. For the formula above, the discrete Grönwall’s lemma gives by taking,

Letbe the numerical approximation ofof the problem (2.6) at the mesh point, respectively.
Based on, it can be obtained

The proof is completed.
∎

We now consider the convergence of the time-discrete scheme (3.13)-(3.14). Denote

Then, we subtract (3.13) from (3.12) to yield the following error equation

with. Subsequently, we establish the following convergence result.

Letbe the solution of (2.6) andbe the numerical approximation of. Then, based on Lemma2.1, it holds that

Analysing similarly to Theorem3.1, we use (3.19) to derive

We analyse each term on the right-hand side of the equation. By (2.18), Lemma2.1and (3.8) arrives at

where we employ. It concludes that

Utilizing (3.11), we have, thus combined with (3.9) yields

In addition, we have

Therefore, the above two formulas deduce

Similarly, we get

which finishes the proof of Theorem3.2.
∎

SECTION: 4Fully discrete finite element scheme

In this section, we give a fully discrete finite element scheme based on a time semi-discrete scheme and derive its convergence result.

Define a quasi-uniform partition ofwith mesh diameterand letbe the space of continuous and piecewise linear functions onwith respect to the partition. Letbe the identity operator. The Ritz projectiondefined byfor anyhas the approximation property[20]

Multiply equation (3.12) byonto obtain the weak formulation for anyand

Drop the local truncation error terms in (4.2) to obtain a fully-discrete finite element scheme: findforsuch that

After solving the numerical solutionin (4.3), we further define the numerical solutionof equation (2.6) as follows

SECTION: 4.1Error estimate of fully discrete scheme

Assume thatsatisfies the regularity assumption in (2.18) andbe the numerical approximation of. Then, the following convergence result holds with

Setwithand. Then we subtract (4.3) from (4.2) and selectto obtain

We multiply the equation byand sumfromtoto get

Since the kernelis positive definite with, we have

and

see[15]. Further, we utilize the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, (4.7), (4.8) andto obtain

By defining a new norm

then we have

We utilize,andto obtain

For the formula above, the discrete Grönwall’s lemma gives by taking,

We combine this withto get

The proof is completed by using (4.9).
∎

SECTION: 5Numerical experiments

In this section, we provide some numerical examples to verify our theoretical results. We define the followingerror to measure the accuracy of the numerical solution

and we obtain the temporal and spatial convergence rates by

Example 1.This example considers the case when the exact solution is unknown with,,,. Set the initial data, the forcing term, and, where.

First, with different, theerrors and temporal convergence orders are shown in Table5.1when. The numerical results in Table5.1demonstrate that our method achievesorder convergence in the time direction asincreases, which is consistent with the theoretical analysis. In Table5.2, we explore theerror and the order of spatial convergence of the finite element scheme whenfor different. Asincreases, the second-order convergence rate in space is observed from Table5.2.

Example 2.This example considers the case when the exact solution is unknown withand. Let the initial data, the forcing term,,and(), where.

Here we consider the second example, in which case. Table5.3reflects the rate of convergencefor the finite element scheme at, with the order of convergence reaching second order astends to. Table5.4lists theerrors and the order of spatial convergence for. The numerical results show that the finite element method achieves stable second order spatial convergence for all tested values of, which is consistent with analytical predictions.

SECTION: 6Conclusions

In this work, we investigate the subdiffusive Black-Scholes model of variable exponent, which is widely applied in situations where the historical information significantly influences the current pricing. A series of transformations are applied to convert the original model into a feasible formulation such that the numerical methods could be designed and analyzed. Numerical experiments are conducted to confirm the theoretical results. The developed model transformation could also be employed in other option pricing models that will be investigated in the near future.

SECTION: Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the National Social Science Foundation of China under Grant 24BTJ006.

SECTION: References